

1 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPENDIUM 
FOR 
DCRMA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
1. THE FRSC ESTABLISHMENT ACT (2007) 
The  Federal  Road  Safety  Commission  was  established  by  Decree  No.  45  of 
February 1988 and amended by Decree No. 35 of 1992.  
The  1992  amendment  was  to  expand  the  operations  of  the Corps  to  all  public 
highways  and  other  additional  functions.  The  two  decrees  were  subsequently 
codified as the FRSC, Act Cap 141 Laws of the Federation of Nigeria (LFN) 1990. 
In  2007  the  Act  was  repealed  and  re-enacted  as  the  FRSC  (Establishment)  Act, 
2007.  
The FRSC “Establishment Bill, 2007” was passed by the Senate on the 6
th
 day of 
February,  2007  and  the  House  of  Representatives  passed  on  May  8,  2007.  The 
“Bill” received Presidential Assent on the 25
th
 day of May, 2007.  
The FRSC (Establishment) Act, 2007 is made up of three (3) parts, thirty one (31) 
Sections and two (2) Schedules. 
1.1 Functions of Federal Road Safety Corps 
While  the  Commission  is  a  policy  making  body,  the  Corps  is  an  operational  body 
that implements the policies of the Commission.  
Section 10 (2)-(11) specifies the functions of the Corps as: 
a. Making the highway safe for motorists and other road users. 
b. Recommending work and devices designed to eliminate or minimize accidents 
and  advising  the  federal  government  and  state  Governments including  the 
FCT   Administration   and   other   relevant   Government   agencies   on   the 
localities where such works and devices are required and; 
c. Educating  motorists  and  members  of  the  public  on  the  importance  of 
discipline on the highway. 
1.2 Powers of Arresting Marshal under the Act 
By virtue of section 10(5), Corps members have powers to arrest and prosecute 
persons reasonably suspected of having committed any traffic offence. 
1.3 Prosecution, Immunity and Protection under the Act 
Section 10(4) of the FRSC (Establishment) Act 2007 empowers members of the 
Corps to arrest and prosecute any person(s) reasonably suspected to have 
committed any traffic offence. 
 
 
 

3 
 
2. FRSC COMMAND STRUCTURE 
Federal Road Safety Commission operates six (6) levels of organisation Structure 
consisting of the following: 
2.1 THE FRSC COMMISSION – The  Commission is  the  highest  decision  making 
organ   with the   obligation   and   responsibility   of   policy   formulation and 
administration of  the  Federal Road  Safety  Corps.  The  Commission  is currently 
headed by Mallam Bukhari Bello Esq. MFR, mni, FDRI with six (6) other Members 
and Corps Marshal FRSC as the secretary. 
2.2    THE    NATIONAL    HEADQUARTERS: This is the highest 
operational/administrative  level,  the  Corps  Marshal  is  exclusively  responsible  for 
the  execution  of  the  policy decisions  of  the  Commission  and  Carrying into effect 
the  day  to  day  activities  of  the  Corps.  The  National  Headquarters  comprises of 
eight (8) Departments, thirteen (13) Corps offices and six (6) Special Units where 
strategic  planning, Administrative and Operational  Orders  and  directives are 
issued. 
2.3  THE  ZONAL COMMAND: This   is   next   in hierarchy to   the   National 
Headquarters which  serves  as  the  field  Command  Headquarters  where  plans, 
orders  and  directives  of  the National  Headquarters  are transmitted  to  the  field 
Commands.  All  field  operations  are  supervised  and  coordinated  from  this  level. 
The  Zonal Command handles  administrative  matters,  Operational  order, discipline 
and other issues relating to staff misconduct. FRSC has 12 (twelve) Zones Spread 
across the country. 
2.4 THE SECTOR COMMANDS: This is the Operational theatre of FRSC where 
deployment  of  personnel  and  operational activities  are  carried  out.  This is the 
third level of Command and control activities of the Corps, it receives Orders and 
Directives from the National Headquarters through the Zonal Commands. It is the 
highest operational level of the Corps. The duties include the following: 
i. Conduct public enlightenment. 
ii. Carry out traffic law enforcement patrol. 
iii. Administer first Aid and rescue services  
iv. Removal of obstruction from the highways 
v. Conduct Road Safety Research activities 
vi. Conduct Accident investigations and Road Safety Audits. 
There are 37 sector Commands including FCT. 

4 
 
2.5 THE  UNIT  COMMANDS: This  is the fourth level  of  the  operational 
structure.  It  receives  orders  and  directives  from  the  sector  Command.  It 
performs  the  same  functions  and  responsibilities as  the  sector  Command.  There 
are 233 Unit Commands. 
2.6 OUT POST: There  are  60  Outpost  Commands.  Outpost commands are being 
supervised by the closest sector or unit command.  
2.7  CORRIDOR  COMMAND: The responsibilities  of  the  Corridor  Commander 
include  monitoring of  all  routes,  assessing and  taking proactive actions on  traffic 
Situations in collaboration with Commands along the Corridor. He reports to ACM 
(Federal Operations) in RSHQ. There are 6 Corridor Commands. 
2.8  STATION  OFFICE: The  corps  established  station  offices  in  the  local 
government areas, especially those local government areas without FRSC presence 
towards  enhancing  the Corps’ visibilities,  public  information  dissemination  as  well 
as intelligence gathering. The functions of station officer include: 
i. Data collection on RTC, NDL, Number plate, RTSSS and hospital follow up. 
ii. Liaising  with  the  Nigerian  police  and  other  relevant  agencies  in  reconciling 
RTC data and other information. 
iii. Identification  and  reporting  of  black  spots  within  the  area  of  jurisdiction 
to Corps Safety Engineering Office (COSEN), RSHQ. 

5 
 
3. FOOT DRILL 
Foot drill is an individual and collective drill carried out at a halt or on the march 
without  the  use  of  arms  or  swords.  It  is  the  formation  of  drills  practiced  at 
platoon and company levels. 
3.1 POSITION OF ATTENTION AND STAND AT EASE 
a. ATTENTION: To assume the  position  of  attention.  Stand with  the  heels 
together,  the feet  turned  out  on an angle  of thirty  (30)  degrees; the  knees 
braced,  the  body  erect,  the  weight  balanced  between  the  ball  of  the  feet  and 
heels, the arms Straight and held to the sides with forearm tucked-in behind the 
hip  bone,  and  wrists  straight, the  hands  closed  with  fingers touching the  thigh 
just behind the seam of trousers, the shoulders held down and back to bring the 
chest  to  a normal  position  without Straining or  stiffening.  The  head  help  up  with 
the neck touching the back of the Collar and the eyes open, still and looking just 
above their own height, the chin tucked in and the mouth closed. 
COMMON FAULTS IN STANDING AT ATTENTION 
i. A Strained position which constricts breathing. 
ii. Allow the body to sag and the shoulders and arms to creep forward. 
iii. Roving eyes. 
iv. Bending the wrist and failing to close hands. 
v. Heels not closed. 
vi. Chewing 
vii. Talking 
viii. Smiling and laughing 
ix. fidgeting 
3.2 STAND AT EASE FROM ATTENTION 
On the Command “Stand at Ease” keeping the right foots still and leg braced back, 
bend the knee and drive the left foot to the ground 12 inches to the left of the 
right  foot,  at  the  same  time  force  the  arms  behind  the  back  keeping  them 
straight,  place  the  back  of  the  right  thumb  crossed  over  to  the  left  thumb  and 
the  fingers  straight and  together.  At the  same  time,  transfer  the  weight of  the 
body to  the  left so  that it remains  evenly  balanced.  The  distance  of  12  inches  is 
measured from the centre of the right heel to the centre of the left heel. 

6 
 
COMMON FAULT IN STANDING AT EASE 
i. Bending at the waist when moving from attention position. 
ii. Allowing the arms to bend or to leave the body when going behind the back. 
iii. Moving the right foot. 
iv. Left  foot  less  than  12  inches  from  the  right foot  and  not  at  the  correct 
angle. 
v. Left foot not instantaneously driven flat on the ground. 
vi. Talking 
vii. Chewing 
 
3.3 SALUTATION 
Salutation is   an   expression   of   reciprocal   loyalty   between   a   superior   and 
subordinate. It  is  perhaps  the  oldest  and  most  formal  military  and  paramilitary 
tradition. It is commonly expressed by hand. Salute can also be rendered by guns, 
swords,  banners or  music. The  Salute  by  hand  originates  from  the  traditional 
declaration, “I hold nothing to harm you”.  
Directions of salute: 
The various  means  of  rendering  salute  are  commonly  expressed  in  three  (3) 
directions: 
a. salute to the Front  
b. salute to the Right and  
c. salute to the Left 
 
3.4 TYPES OF SALUTE: 
a. Compliments: This  can  be  described  as  routine  salute  which  must  be 
rendered by subordinates to the superior on each contact. When the head dress is 
worn,  the  subordinate  will  pay  the  compliment  with  his  hand and  when  no  head 
dress is worn, the subordinate will bring his two hands firmly to his sides and look 
in  the  direction  of  the  superior,  chest  out  and  greet.  There  is  no  time  limit  for 
routine compliments. The superior also will reciprocate accordingly. 
b. Funfair: This  is  usually  played  to  usher  in  the  Reviewing  Officer  or  the 
Special  Guest  of  Honour  to  an  occasion.  When  funfair  is being  rendered  the 
normal  salute  by  hand  is  not  required.  The  Special  Guest  of  Honour  or  the 
Reviewing/  Inspecting  Officer  is  expected  to  use  the  opportunity  to  mount  the 

7 
 
saluting dice if available and assume the position of attention in readiness for the 
National or general salute whichever is applicable 
c. General salute: The  General Salute is played to honour and welcome VIP's 
or Senior Officers to Military or Paramilitary functions, ie ceremonial parades or 
gathering. When it is being rendered, the VIP or the Senior Officer to whom the 
salute is being given, if in uniform will assume the position of attention and salute. 
d. National salute: This is the highest salute. The National Salute is played to 
honour  and  welcome  the  Special  Guest  of  Honour  or  the Reviewing  Officer  to 
Military  or  Para- Military  occasions.  The  following  VIPs  are  entitled  to  national 
salute   Mr.   President   or   his   representative,   the   Vice   President   or   his 
representative, the Executive Governors the senate President, the Speaker House 
of Representative and the Chief Justice of the Federation etc. 
 

8 
 
4. FRSC DRESS CODE 
The  "FRSC  Dress  Codes"  is  a  standard  of  dress  policy  for  the  Corps'  uniform 
variations. It is used to communicate to all staff what the Corps considers to be 
the appropriate work attire for each day, operation, cadre and specialization. 
4.1 Dress Code and description 
No. 1 (One) Dress (Ceremonial Dress) 
Worn on ceremonial occasions such as: 
 National Parade 
 Passing-out Parade 
 Ceremonial Wedding 
 Remembrance Day Parade  
 National Honours Award Ceremonies 
 Pullout parade (for retiring officers) 
Features 
 Peak Cap with appropriate cap badge 
 Gold waist band with sword carrier (ACM- CM) 
 Red waist band with sword carrier (ARC-CC) 
 White belt and anklet for marshals 
 White long sleeve shirt 
 Black tie 
 Sword (as appropriate) 
 A pair of white hand gloves 
 Black trousers with gold stripe (ACM-CM) 
 Black trousers with red stripe (ARC-CC) 
 ACC and above to use appropriate gorget (red neck) 
 Ceremonial rank 
 Name tag, Lanyard as appropriate  
 Black laced shoes and Black socks without design 
 
Service Dress/No. 2 (Two) Dress 
 Has the same top with No. One dress while the trouser is plain. 
 Is  worn  to  the  church  or  mosque  for  Official  function,  lectures/seminars, 
graduation and for friend’s occasion or as requested by the authority. 
Features 
 Has the same top as Ceremonial Dress, but; 
 No waist band 

9 
 
 No sword 
 The trouser has no red or golden band or stripe 
 Service rank 
 ACC and above to use appropriate garget 
Mess Kit/No. 3 (Three) Dress 
Worn  for  regimental  dinner as  organized  in  the  Officers’  Mess    or  assigned 
location E.g: 
 Anniversary Regimental Dinner 
 Sendoff for Senior Retired Officer  
 End of course dinner at the Training Institutions 
 Invitation for regimental function by Sister organizations 
Features 
 White jacket with blue lapels 
 Golden stripe on black trousers (ACM – CM) 
 Blue stripe on black trousers (ARC-CC) 
 Ceremonial rank 
 White long sleeve shirt 
 Black bow tie 
 Gold camour band on shirt (ACM-CM) 
 Blue camour band on shirt (ARC-CC) 
 No head dress 
 Name tag (pin type) 
 Black socks (without design) 
 Black laced shoes 
No. 4 Dress (WORK OUT DRESS) 
 Jacket and trouser for office work 
 Worn on Wednesdays to Fridays 
 Must not be worn for patrol duties 
Features 
 White round neck inner vest 
 Maroon or white beret with appropriate cap badge 
 ACC and above to use appropriate gorget 
 General duty rank 
 Name tag 
 Lanyard as appropriate 

10 
 
 Black socks (without design) 
 Black laced shoes 
No. 5 (Five) Dress: 
Worn for office duties 
 5a: ARC- CM (worn on Mondays and Tuesdays) 
Not to be worn with skirt. 
 5b: Marshals 
Features for No. 5a 
 Maroon short sleeve beige collared shirt (sleeves must not be rolled up) 
tucked-in on black trousers   
 White round neck inner vest 
 Beige epaulette 
 Maroon general duty rank 
 Service belt (as appropriate) 
 Name tag 
 Lanyard (as appropriate) 
 Black socks (without design) 
 Black laced shoes or boots 
Features for No. 5b 
 Beige  short  sleeve  shirt  (sleeves  must  not  be  rolled  up)  tucked-in  on 
black trousers  
 White round neck inner vest 
 General duty rank 
 Service belt (as appropriate) 
 Name tag as appropriate 
 Lanyard as appropriate 
 Black socks (without design) 
 Black laced shoes or boots 
No. 6 (Six) Dress 
 Combat/fatigue dress 
 For patrol operations, field work, special assignments  and training only 
 Sleeves must not be rolled up 
 With combat boot only 

11 
 
Features 
 White round neck inner vest 
 Either long or short sleeve khaki shirt tucked-in on black khaki trouser  
 Patrol hat (jungle hat) 
 Two (2) patched side pockets and 2 patched back pockets on trousers 
 General duty rank 
 Service belt (as appropriate) 
 Name tag as appropriate 
4.2 OTHERS 
Pull Over 
 Knitted maroon jumper  
 Worn on top of Dress  5 and 6 
 Not to be worn alone 
Features 
 Maroon colour 
 V- neck (for Officers) 
 Round neck (for Marshals) 
 Must have provision to hang appropriate rank 
 Must be worn with appropriate General duty rank 
 Name tag as appropriate 
 FRSC logo on the left side of the chest 
Maternity Dress 
It  is  a  maternity  gown  worn  during  pregnancy.  Approval  must  be  given  by  the 
commanding Officer/HOD for a staff to wear it. 
Features 
 Beige colour short gown just above the knee 
 Can be worn with black trousers or skirt with beret 
 White round neck inner vest 
 Rank badge 
 Lanyard, name tag   and service shoes with black socks 
 
 

12 
 
5. FRSC REGULATIONS ON DISCIPLINE, 2018 
5.1 Offences Relating To Duty 
a. AWOL - Major Entry and forfeiture of Salary for the number of days. 
b. Desertion - Dismissal  
c.  Dereliction of duty – Loss of seniority 
d.  Lateness – minor entry or reprimand. 
e.  Malingering -Major Entry and forfeiture of Salary for the number of days. 
f.  Acts of Negligence – Loss of seniority 
5.2 Offences Relating To Information 
a. unauthorized disclosure of Information-Termination 
b. facture to make report - Loss of seniority  
c.  Presentation of false document or certificate – Termination 
d. Unauthorised educational qualification - Loss of seniority. 
e. Concealment of higher qualification on Appointment- Loss of seniority. 
5.3 Offences  Relating  to  Borrowing,  Lending  Debts,  Illegal  Employment, 
Petitions and Improper Dressing 
a. Borrowing from junior staff – Reduction in rank. 
b. Failure to pay debt – Reduction in Rank 
c. Carrying on any other paid employment – Termination 
d. Influenced promotion – Major Entry. 
e. Improper dressing - Major Entry. 
f. Anonymous petition – Termination 
5.4 Offences Relating to Corruption, Gross Misconduct and Indiscipline 
a. Obstructing Marshals on Duty – Loss of seniority. 
b. Incivility to member of the public - Loss of seniority. 
c. Maltreatment and false complaint – Major Entry. 
d. Bribe – Termination of Appointment. 
e. Failure to make entry after patrol - Reduction in rank. 
f. False Allegation - Termination of Appointment 
g. Disobedience to Standing/particular order – Major Entry. 
h. Failure to pay compliment - Magic Entry. 
i. Improper channel of correspondence – Reduction in Rank. 
j. Drinking or smoking while on duty – Reduction in Rank. 
k. Forgery - Termination of Appointment 
l. Assault/civic conduct- Reduction in Rank. 
m. Manslaughter/murder- (criminality)  handed  over  to  police,  placed  on  half 
salary and upon conviction dismissed from service. 
n. Mutiny- dismissal from service. 
o. Rape – dismissal from service. 
p. Rioting – Dismissal from service. 
q. Scandalous behaviour- termination of appointment. 
r. Rudeness to superior- loss of seniority. 

13 
 
s. Stealing or looting- dismissal from service. 
t. Treason- handed  over  to  police,  placed  on  half  salary  and  dismissal  from 
service upon conviction. 
5.5 Offences relating property 
a. Damage  to  property: Replacement  of  the  property  damaged  within  3 
months. 
b. Driving  and  damaging  of  Corps  vehicle  by  non-commissioned  driver  or 
offender’s vehicle – Payment  of  cost  of  repairs  or  replacement  of  vehicle 
within three (3) months or have appointment termination. 
5.6 Offences relating information processing 
a. Unauthorised production of driver licence- Termination of appointment. 
b. Unauthorised production of number plate- Termination of appointment. 
c. Duty room offences- Reduction in rank. 
 
5.7 Other offences 
a. failure to testify before FDP- Reduction in rank 
b. False information to FDP- Reduction in rank 
c. Wilfully insults/assaults in FDP- Reduction in rank 
d. Continuous misconduct- Termination of appointment. 
 

14 
 
6. HIGHWAY CODE LITERACY 
6.1 ROAD 
A  road  is  a  path  established  over  land  for  the  passage  of  vehicles,  people,  and 
animals.  It provides  dependable  pathway  for  moving  people  and  goods  from  one 
place  to  another. Roads  are  typically  smooth,  paved,  or  otherwise,  prepared  to 
allow easy travel.  
Types of Road 
Roads may be classified as: 
a. Private drive pathways 
b. Two-lane highways 
c. Dual carriageways 
d. Expressway 
Private Drive Pathways: These are  roads  owned,  maintained  or  controlled  by  an 
individual, agency or organization. 
Two-Lane Highways: These are the usual single carriageways. Traffic on two-lane 
highways normally flow in opposite direction on single lane. Two-lane highways may 
be rural, urban, intra or intercity roads. 
Dual  Carriageway: This  is  a  road  which  has  multiple  lanes  with  traffic  going  in 
opposite  direction.  They  may  or  may  not be  physically  separated  by  non-passable 
dividers such as concrete barrier.  
Road Junctions 
A junction is the place where two or more roads meet. There are four (4) types of 
junctions, namely: 
a. T –Junction: This is a place where two roads meet in the shape of letter T. 
b. Y-Junction: This is a place where two roads meet in the form of letter Y. 
c. Cross Road: A cross road is the place where two roads meet and cross each 
other. It could be in the form of: 
 A major road crossing a minor road; or 
 Two equal roads crossing each other. 
d. Roundabout: A  place  where  two  or  more  roads  meet,  forming  a  circle  that 
ensures that all traffic must go around in the same direction. 
 

15 
 
Road signs 
Road  traffic  signs  are  structural  designs  erected  along  the  roadsides  for  the 
purpose of directing, warning and informing the motoring public and pedestrians of 
road features ahead to guide their decisions. 
A good knowledge of road traffic signs is compulsory for all drivers, as these are 
the basic communication means with the road that guarantees safe motoring. 
These regulate and guide the decisions of drivers well ahead of any feature they 
would come across on the road. 
The  traffic  signs  are  erect,  while  markings  are  done  on  the  road  pavement,  all 
serving the same purpose. 
Road signs are basically of three categories 
 Warning or Danger signs 
 Regulatory signs 
 Informative signs 
Of the three categories of road signs, the regulatory signs are divided into  
 Prohibitory signs: They usually give negative instructions and are circular in 
shape with yellow background. However the STOP sign which is octagonal in 
shape, the NO WAITING and NO STOPPING sign with blue background and 
red border also belongs to the prohibitory signs 
  Mandatory signs: Give positive instructions. They are circular and blue.  
All the signs are identified by their shapes and colors 

16 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
6.2 Traffic Signals 
Traffic signals  control  vehicle  and  pedestrian  traffic  by  assigning  priorities  to 
various traffic movements to influence traffic flow. 
RED means "Stop" Wait behind the stop line on the carriageway 
RED and Amber also mean 'Stop’. Do not pass through or start until GREEN shows. 
GREEN means go on if the road is clear. When turning left or right take particular 
care and give way to pedestrians crossing. 
AMBER means stop at the stop line. Go only if the AMBER green signal if appears 
after crossing the stop line or when pulling up might cause crash. 
A GREEN ARROW may be provided in addition to the full green signal if movement 
in a certain direction is allowed before or after the full green phase. If the way is 
clear  go  but  only in  the  direction  shown  by  the  arrow  irrespective  of  what other 
lights may be showing. 
6.3 Categories of Road Users 
Who are road users? 
Road  users  are  group  of  people or  animals  who  use  the  road  by performing 
different activities. The following are some group of road users. 
a. Motorists 
b. Cyclists 
c. Motorcyclist 
d. Pedestrians 
e. Animals 
6.4 Road markings 
Road  markings are  symbols  or  lettered  messages  painted  on  the  road  to  warn  or 
instruct  road  users  of  the  road  condition.  Road  markings  are  basically  of  four 
major types centre lines, edge lines, cross walks and pavement messages. 
Centre Lines 
a. Diagonal White Lines (Hatched Markings) 
These  are  lines  used  at  the  center  of  the  road  to  separate  opposing  flows  of 
traffic.  They  are  often  provided  at  junctions  to  protect  traffic  turning  left  It 
may  also  be used on the  approach  to  central  traffic island  or  the  start of  a dual 
carriageway. Single, broken boundary line may be used at the edge of the road or 
next to the central reservation of a dual carriageway 
Do not enter any hatched area bounded by broken lines unless it is safe to do so. 
 

18 
 
b. Continuous White Lines 
Some  double  continuous  white  lines  have  narrow  areas  of  hatched  lines  within 
them or a wider area of hatching to the side. You MUST NOT cross a continuous 
white line to enter a hatched area. 
c. Chevron Markings  
Chevron  markings  are  found  on  part  of  the  carriageway  where  traffic  passes  in 
the  same  direction  on  either  side.  The  continuous  boundary  line  means  vehicles 
MUST NOT enter the area. 
d. Chevron Markings with Broken Edge  
Chevron Markings with Broken Edge are used on part of carriageway where traffic 
passes  in  the  same  direction  on  either side. Vehicles  are not  expected  to  enter 
the area unless it is safe to do so. 
e. Block Pavement Markings at Roundabouts 
Block pavement markings  incorporated into  a roundabout indicate  sharp  deviation 
of route. 
This shows reduction in number of lanes or areas not available to traffic. Vehicles 
MUST   NOT   cross   the   continuous   white   lines   except   in   an   emergency,

19 
 
7. FRSC COMMITMENTS 
7.1 VISION 
To eradicate Road  Traffic  Crashes  and  create  safe  motoring  environment  in 
Nigeria. 
 
7.2 MISSION 
Regulate,  Enforce  and  Coordinate all Road  Traffic  and  Safety  Management 
activities through: 
 Sustained Public Enlightenment. 
 Promotion of Stakeholder Cooperation. 
 Robust Data Management. 
 Improved Vehicle Administration. 
 Prompt Rescue Services. 
 Effective Patrol Operations. 
 
7.3 CORE VALUES 
• Transparency 
• Fairness 
• Timeliness 
• Service Orientation 
7.4 QUALITY POLICY 
The  Federal  Road  Safety  Corps  is  committed  to  creating  a  safer motoring 
environment  through  compliance  with  the  FRSC  (Establishment)  Act  2007,  other 
traffic  laws  and  quality  management  system  standards  with  a  view  to  continually 
improving its mode of operations. 

20 
 
8. FRSC NOTICE OF OFFENCE SHEET 
S/N INFRINGEMENTS CODE POINTS PENALTY CATEGORY 
1 Ascertainment of Weight violation AWV  2,000 2 
2 Assaulting Marshal on Duty AMD 10 10,000 2 
3 Attempting To Corrupt Marshal on 
Duty 
ACS 10 10,000 2 
4 Caution Sign Violation CSV 3 3,000 3 
5 Child Restraint Violation CRV 6 3,000 1 
6 Child Sitting Position Violation CPV 6 3,000 1 
7 Construction Area Speed Limit 
Violation 
CAV 3 3,000 1 
8 Dangerous Driving DGD 10 50,000 1 
9 Do Not Move Violation DNM 2 2,000 2 
10 Drivers Licence Violation DLV 10 10,000 2 
11 Driving Right Hand Steering Vehicle DRV 10 3,000 and 
forfeiture 
of vehicle 
1 
12 Driving With Worn-Out Tyre TYV 3 3,000 1 
13 Driving With Expired/Without 
Spare Tyre 
EWT 2 2,000 3 
14 Excessive Smoke Emission ESE 5 5,000 1 
15 Failure To Cover Unstable Materials FCM 5 5,000 1 
16 Failure To Fix Red Flag on Projected 
Load 
FFF 3 3,000 1 
17 Failure To Install Speed Limiting 
Device 
SLD 3 3,000 2 
18 Failure To Move Over FMO 3 3,000 1 
19 Failure To Report Road Crash FRC 10 20,000 1 
20 Fire Extinguisher Violation FEV 3 3,000 3 
21 Fleet Operation Violation FOV - 200,000 3 
22 Inadequate Construction Warning 
Sign 
ICW - 50,000 1 
23 Instructors Permit and Training 
Violation 
IPTV 10 2,000 2 
24 Latching and Twist-Locks Violation LTV 10 5,000 1 
25 Learner’s Driving Regulation 
Violation 
LDV 10 3,000 1 
26 Light/Sign Violation LSV 2 2,000 2 
27 Number Plate Violation NPV 3 3,000 1 
28 Medical Personnel/Hospital 
Rejection of Road Crash Victim 
RCV - 50,000 1 
29 Operating Mechanically Deficient MDV 5 5,000 1 

21 
 
Vehicle 
30 Obstructing Marshal on Duty OMD 3 2,000 2 
31 Operating a Vehicle with Forged 
Documents 
OFD 10 20,000 2 
32 Overloading OVL 10 10,000 1 
33 Passenger’s Manifest Violation PMV 10 10,000 2 
34 Preaching or Hawking in Commercial 
Vehicle 
PHV - 50,000 1 
35 Projected Load in Excess of 
Prescribed Limit 
PLE 3 3,000 1 
36 Riding Motorcycle without Using 
Crash Helmet 
RMH 2 2,000 1 
37 Road Obstruction ROB 5 3,000 1 
38 Road marking Violation RMV 5 5,000 1 
39 Route Violation RTV 10 5,000 1 
40 School Bus Violation SBV 2 2,000 1 
41 Seat Belt Violation SUV 5 2,000 1 
42 Speed Limit Violation SLV 5 5,000 1 
43 Unauthorized Removal/Tampering 
with Road Sign 
UTS 5 5,000 1 
44 Under Age Driving/Riding UDR - 2,000 1 
45 Use of Phone While Driving UPD 4 4,000 1 
46 Use of Sirens Violation USV 3 2,000 1 
47 Vehicle Licence Violation VLV 3 3,000 2 
48 Vehicle Identification Tag Violation VITV 2 3,000 1 
49 Vehicle Mirror Violation VMV 3 3,000 1 
50 Vehicle Windshield Violation VWV 2 2,000 1 
51 Wrongful Overtaking WOV 3 3,000 1 
52 Driving Under Alcohol Or Drug 
Influence 
DUI 5 5,000 2 
53 Other Offences/Violations 
(Specify.............) 
OPV - - - 
 

22 
 
9. FIRST AID 
9.1 What is First Aid? 
First  Aid is  the immediate medical  treatment  given  to  a  victim  with  available 
material before transport to the nearest health facility. 
9.2 Objectives of First Aid 
 To preserve life 
 To promote recovery 
 To prevent the condition of victims from worsening.  
9.3 Items in a First Aid Box 
a. Bandage 
b. Adhesive plaster 
c. Lint/gauze 
d. Scissors 
e. Cotton wool 
f. Safety pin 
g. Tincture of iodine 
h. Wooden spatula 
i. Crepe bandage 
j. Antiseptic fluid 
k. Gloves 
 

23 
 
 
10. ROAD TRAFFIC CRASH 
10.1 Definition of Road Traffic Accident 
Road traffic accident is defined as a collision involving one or more vehicles. It can 
also involve other "moving objects," such as a pedestrian or cyclist. Fixed objects, 
such as a tree, a wall, or a parked vehicle, can play a role as well 
10.2 Types of RTC 
i.  Fatal crash: A road traffic crash  which  involved  loss  of  life  and  injury to 
people, including damage to property (including motor vehicle, road infrastructure 
e.t.c.).  It  is  also  a  crash  in  which  death  occurred  arising  from  injury  sustained 
from a crash within 30 days of crash occurrence. 
ii. Serious  crash: A  road  traffic  crash  which  did  not  lead  to  death  but 
resulted  in  injury  to  any  person  (passengers  or  other  road  users)  and  damage  to 
property (including motor vehicle, road infrastructure e.t.c.). 
iii. Minor  crash: A  road  traffic  crash  which  did  not  involve  loss  of  life  or 
injury to people or serious damage to property. 
10.3 Causes of RTC 
After several researches, causes of road traffic crashes have been grouped into 
three according to the causative factors. These factors are: 
 Human factor 
 Mechanical factor 
 Environmental factor 
a. Human  Factor – Human  factor contributes to about  90%  of  the  road 
crashes. Drivers alone contribute about 80% to the crashes. Some of the specific 
causes are, overconfidence, speed, lack of concentration, tiredness, driving under 
the influence of drugs or alcohol, poor vehicle care, indiscriminate parking, wrong 
or dangerous overtaking, passengers distraction, and pedestrian behavior. 
b. Mechanical  Factor – Mechanical  factor has  been  known  to  contribute  in 
about  10%  of  the  crashes  on  our  roads.  Crashes  due  to  this  factor  have  the 
following as some of the causes: 
 Malfunctioning of engine 
 Poor steering mechanism 
 Tyre burst 
 Brake failure 

24 
 
c. Environmental  Factors – Environmental  factor refers  to  road  elements 
including weather that contributes to crashes.  
 
 
 
 
 