

  
Lagos State of Nigeria 
 
Official Gazette 
 
 
 
No 27 Ikeja – 3
rd
 August 2012 Vol. 45 
 
 
Lagos State Government Notice No 28 
 
The following is published as supplement to this Gazette 
 
 
  page 
 
Law No 4 
 
A law to provide for Road Traffic Administration and make 
provisions for Road Traffic and Vehicle Inspection in Lagos State 
and other connected purposes. 
 
 
A75 – 153 
 
  

Supplement to Lagos State of Nigeria Official Gazette No 27, Vol 45 0f 3
rd
 August 2012 
 
Assented to at Ikeja this 2
nd
 day of August 2012 
 
Mr Babatunde Raji Fashola (SAN) 
Governor of Lagos State 
 
 
Lagos State of Nigeria 
 
Lagos State Road Traffic Law 2012 
No 4 of 2012 
 
 
Arrangement of Sections 
 
 
 
A law to provide  for Road Traffic  Administration and  make  provisions for Road Traffic  and Vehicle Inspection in  Lagos 
State and other connected purposes. 
 
2
nd
 day of August 2012 
 
The Lagos State House of Assembly enacts as follows: 
 
1. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 11 of the Lagos State Traffic Management Authority Law, the 
Authority’s control and management of vehicular traffic in the State, shall include the; 
 
(a) Prohibition  or  restriction  of  the  use  of  any  specified highway  by  vehicles  of  specified  class  or 
description; 
 
(b) Prohibition of driving or propelling of vehicles on any specified highway otherwise than in a specified 
direction; 
(c)  Prohibition of vehicles parking or waiting on any specified highway; 
 
(d)  Prohibition  or  restriction  of  the  use  of  sirens,  and  the sounding  of  horns  or  other  similar  appliances 
either in general or during specified hours or in respect of specified areas; 
 
(e)  Regulation of the conduct of  persons driving, propelling, being in charge  of or riding any  vehicle  or 
animal on a highway; 
 
(f)  Application of breath testing, blood and urine specimen testing devices on any driver to detect driving 
under the influence of alcohol, or drugs; 
 
(g)  Demand  of  a  psychiatric  evaluation  of  any  person  who drives  against  the  normal  flow  of  traffic  or 
who  fails  to  comply with  any  of  the  provisions  of  this  Law,  if  in  the  opinion  of  any officer  of  the 
Authority  such  an  evaluation  is  necessary  for  the purpose  of  determining  the  person’s  ability  to 
operate a motor vehicle provided that such shall be at the driver’s cost; and 
 
(h)  General regulation of traffic on public highways. 
 
(2)  In  the  exercise  of  the  functions  conferred  on  the  Authority,  officers of  the  Authority  shall  have  power  to 
arrest  where  appropriate  and  allow the alleged offender to  pay the fine stipulated  for the offence  under this 
Law. 
 
(3)  The Authority shall have power to designate part of the under listed routes as bus lanes for priority services 
during peak hours of 6:00a.m –10:a.m and 4:00p.m – 9:00p.m; 
 
(a)  Ikotun-Ejigbo-Cele Expressway; 
 

(b)  Iyana Ipaja-Agege Pen Cinema Ogba-Ojodu Berger; 
 
(c)  Iyana Ipaja-Idimu-Iyana Iba Roundabout; 
 
(d)  Iyana Ipaja-Idimu-Ikotun; 
 
(e)  Berger-Third Mainland Bridge-Tafawa Balewa Square (TBS); 
 
(f)  Iyana Oworo-Anthony-Oshodi-Mile 2-Apapa; 
 
(g)  Sango-Iyana Ipaja-Oshodi; and 
 
(h)  Orile Iganmu-Mile 2-Okokomaiko. 
 
(4) Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Section  211  of  the  1999  Constitution of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Nigeria,  the 
Authority may prosecute persons reasonably suspected of having committed any offence under the provisions 
of this Law or any other Law. 
 
2  (1)  Save as may be prescribed by the  Commissioner by regulation, no trailer other than petrol tankers and long 
vehicles used in conveying passengers, shall enter into or travel within the metropolis of Lagos between the hours of 
6.00am - 9.00pm. 
 
(2)  Any driver  who is found contravening the  provisions of this Section shall  have  his  vehicle  impounded by a 
duly  authorised  officer  of the  Authority  and  shall  upon  conviction  be  liable  to  a  fine  of ₦50,000 (Fifty 
Thousand Naira) or a term of imprisonment for 6 months or both. 
 
3  (1)  No  person  shall  ride,  drive  or  propel  a  cart,  wheel  barrow, motorcycle  or  tricycle  on  any  of  the  routes 
specified in Schedule 11 to this Law 
 
(2)  No person shall operate a motorcycle or tricycle without a Rider’s Card  issued  by  the Lagos  State  Motor 
Vehicle Administration Agency. 
 
(3)  No person shall operate a  motorcycle or tricycle either as a rider or a passenger without wearing a standard 
protective crash helmet as may be prescribed under the Regulations to this Law. 
 
(4)  No motorcycle operator shall carry more than one (1) passenger at a time, provided that a pregnant woman, a 
child  below  the  age  of  12  years, or  an  adult  with  a  baby  or  heavy/large  load  placed  on  the  head  or  which 
obstruct normal sitting on the motorcycle shall not be carried as passenger. 
 
(5)  Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Section commits an offence and shall be 
liable on conviction to- 
 
(i)  Imprisonment  for  a  term  of  three  (3)  years  or  to  render community  service  in  accordance  with  the 
provisions of Section347 of the Administration of Criminal Justice Law of Lagos State; and 
 
(ii)  Have his vehicle forfeited to the State. 
 
(6)  Where a rider is convicted of an offence under subsections (1), (3) and (4) of this Section, the passenger shall 
also be liable to the same penalty, provided the passenger is not a child. 
 
(7)  Subject  to  Section  38  of  this  Law,  the  Commissioner  may  make regulations  providing  for  any  matter 
necessary for the purpose of controlling the use of motorcycles and tricycles in the State. 
 
(8)  As  from  the  commencement  of  this  law  commercial  motorcycles  can  only  operate  between  the  hours  of 
6.00a.m-8.00p.m within the State. 
 
4  (1)  The Ministry shall cause or permit traffic signs to be placed on or near any highway. 
  
(2)  Traffic signs shall conform to such standards and be of such sizes, colours or types as may be prescribed by 
the Ministry. 
 
(3)  After  the  commencement  of  this  Law,  no  traffic  sign  shall  be placed  on  or  near  any  highway  except  in 
accordance with the provisions of this Law: 
 
Provided  that  nothing  in  this  Law  shall  apply  to  any  traffic  sign  placed  by the  owners  or  workers  of  any 
railway,  light  railway,  dock  undertaking  or harbour  undertaking  in  pursuance  of  powers  conferred  by  any 
other enactment in force in Nigeria. 
 

(4)  The  Ministry  may  by  notice  in  writing  require  the  owner  or occupier  of  any  land  on  which  there  is  any 
unauthorized traffic  sign or any object  which so closely resembles a  traffic  sign that  it  might reasonably be 
taken  to  be  such  a  sign,  to  remove  it,  and  if  such  notice  is  not  complied with,  the  Ministry  may  effect  the 
removal, doing as little damage as maybe possible, and may recover the cost of such removal from the person 
in default. 
 
5  (1)  When  it  appears  to  the  Authority  that  any  highway  should  be closed  temporarily  to  vehicular  traffic,  the 
Authority shall cause to be fix at each end of such highway a notice to the effect that such highway is closed until 
said notices are removed by the order of the Authority; 
 
Provided that in cases of emergency, the  Authority may grant permit in writing to the person named therein 
to use specified vehicles on the said highway on the occasion and for the purpose. 
 
(2)  The  Commissioner  may  by  notice  published  in  the  State  Gazette, or  in  a national  newspaper,  close  any 
highway,  either  permanently  or  for such  time  as  may  be  specified  in  the  notice,  to  any  or  every  kind  of 
vehicular traffic subject to such exceptions as he may think fit. 
 
(3)  From the commencement of this Law, it shall be an offence – 
 
(a)  To display wares on any walkway; and 
 
(b)  For commercial buses to pick or drop passengers on the fast lane or in any undesignated bus-stop in the State. 
 
6  (1) The Ministry shall cause to be placed in a conspicuous place at both ends or near the bridge a notice to the effect 
that – 
 
(a)  The bridge is not designed to carry more than a certain weight; 
 
(b)  A vehicle exceeding a certain breadth or height cannot with safety be driven on or over such bridge; 
 
(c)  Vehicles  may  not  exceed  a  specified  speed  limit  when crossing  the  bridge  and  thereafter  any  person 
who contravenes or fails to comply with the terms of such notice shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
  
(2)  When any bridge is damaged – 
 
(a)  By reason of any vehicle passing over it in contravention of the provisions of this section; or 
 
(b)  By reason of any vehicle  when passing over the bridge coming into contact with any portion thereof 
other  than  the  surface of  the  roadway,  the  owner  of  the  vehicle  and  the  person  driving  or propelling 
the  same  shall,  without  prejudice  to  any  other  penalty stipulated  by  this  Law  for  that  offence,  be 
jointly and severally liable to the Government for any damage done thereto. 
 
(3)  A certificate under the hand of an officer of the Ministry for the cost of repairing such damage shall, be prima 
facie evidence of such cost. 
 
(4)  For the purposes of this Section, the weight of a vehicle which is towing any other vehicle shall be deemed to 
be the gross weight of that vehicle and of the vehicle or vehicles being towed by it.  
 
7  Where an officer of the Authority is for the time being engaged in the neglect of regulation of traffic on a highway, 
or  where  any  traffic  sign  being  a  sign traffic  directions.  For  regulating  the  movement  of  traffic  or  indicating  the 
route to be followed by vehicle has been lawfully placed on or near a highway in accordance with the provisions of 
this Law, any person driving or propelling any vehicle, who– 
 
(a)  Neglects  or  refuses  to  stop  the  vehicle  or  to  make  it  proceed or  to  keep  to  a particular  lane  or  direction  of 
traffic when directed to do so by the officer in the execution of his duty; or 
 
(b)  Drives  his  vehicle  against  oncoming  traffic  or  fails  to conform  to  the  direction  or  indication  given  by  the 
traffic sign, shall be guilty of an offence, and shall be liable on conviction for: 
 
(i)  1
st
 offender one (1) year imprisonment and forfeiture of the vehicle to the State; 
 
(ii)  2
nd
 and subsequent offender three (3) years imprisonment and forfeiture of the vehicle to the State. 
 
(c)  All offenders shall have their data and biometrics captured. 
 

8.  (1) Where  a  motor vehicle  is  stationary or abandoned on a  Highway or abandoned street or near private  premises, 
any Police Officer, member of the Task vehicles from Force or officer of the Authority may cause the vehicle to be 
removed Highway and to a vehicle park if – 
  
(a)  The  officer  has  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  the location  of  the  vehicle  is  in  contravention  of  the 
provisions of any enactment or Regulation relating to the parking of vehicles; and 
 
(b)  He has reasonable grounds for believing either – 
 
(i)  That the vehicle is not in a condition in which it can be moved under its own power; or 
 
(ii)  That no person authorized to drive the vehicle is in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle. 
 
 
(2)  The  owner  or  occupier  of  the  premises  adjoining  the  Highway  or private  premises  where  the  vehicle  is 
stationary  or  abandoned  shall  lodge  a report  of  such  vehicle  to  the  nearest  office  of  the  Authority  or  to  the 
nearest police station. 
 
(3)  Where the owner or occupier of premises adjoining the High way or private premises fails to make a report 
of a stationary or an abandoned vehicle to the office of the Authority or the  nearest Police Station within48 
hours, the owner or occupier of such premises shall be  guilty of an offence and on conviction be liable to a 
fine of twenty-five thousand naira (₦25,000.00). 
 
(4)  Where the  vehicle  was found not to have been abandoned but left on the  highway for an unreasonably long 
time, the owner shall bear the cost of towing the vehicle to a vehicle park as prescribed in Schedule I to this 
Law and the owner of the  vehicle shall be guilty of an offence and on conviction shall be liable to a fine of 
fifty thousand naira (₦50,000.00) or to a term of imprisonment for three (3) months or both. 
 
(5)  Where  the  owner  of  an  abandoned  or  removed  vehicle  fails  to claim  the  vehicle  for  a  period  of  one  (1) 
month, the Ministry shall publish a notice of its intention to dispose the abandoned or removed vehicle at the 
end of one (1) calendar month from the date of such publication in the State Official Gazette and one national 
newspaper. 
 
(6)  The Ministry shall, at the end of one (1) month’s notice, dispose such vehicle. 
 
9  (1) It shall be the duty of the State to 
 
(a)   Provide  suitable  facilities  (including  equipment  and operators)  for  the  removal  of  vehicles  in 
pursuance of the provisions of Section 8 above; 
 
(b)   Provide and  maintain places to  which vehicles  may be removed to in pursuance of the  provisions of 
Section 8 above and to ensure that an officer in charge of each Park is at all times present in the Park; 
 
(c)  Make reasonable  arrangement  for  the  safe  custody  of removed  vehicles  while  they  are  in  vehicle 
parks; 
 
(d)  To  provide  and  maintain  at  the  principal  offices  of  the Authority  a  record  containing  particulars  of 
each removed vehicle and its contents and specifying the date of its removal, and the parking which it 
is situated; and 
 
(e)  To keep the record open during normal office  hours for inspection free of charge by members of the 
public. 
 
(2)  The  Authority  shall  not  be  under  any  duty  to  protect  removed vehicles  otherwise  than  as  mentioned  in 
paragraph  (c)  of  the  fore going subsection  (1)  above  and  in  particular  shall  not  be  under  a  duty  to  protect 
removed vehicles from damage attributable to sun, rain, wind or other physical conditions. 
 
10  A person who tenders to the official in charge of a vehicle Park–  
 
(a)  Such  evidence  as  may  be  prescribed  of  his  entitlement  to the  custody  of  a  removed  vehicle  which  is  in  the 
Park; and 
 
(b)  Payment of appropriate charges in respect of the vehicle and an official receipt thereof; shall, be entitled, on 
demand  at  the park at any time between the hours of eight o’clock in the morning and six o’clock in the 
evening on any  weekday (other than a  public holiday) and with consent given on behalf of the  Authority at 
any other time, to have the vehicle delivered up to him at the park. 
 
11  (1) There is established the Vehicle Inspection Service (referred to in of the Vehicle this Law as ―the Service‖). 

 
(2) The service shall be a directorate in the Ministry of Transportation 
 
12 The Service shall have responsibility for of the Service. 
 
(1)  (a) inspecting, controlling, regulating and enforcing the road worthiness of motor vehicles in the State; 
 
(b)  Pre-registration inspection of vehicles; 
 
(c)  Co-operating with other agencies to enforce traffic rules and regulations; 
 
(d)  Providing accessible emergency services; 
 
(e)  Co-operating with relevant agencies engaged in road safety activities or in the prevention of accidents 
on the highways; 
 
(f)  Inspection and issuance of Road Worthiness Certificate (RWC) in respect of all vehicles; 
 
(g)  Ensuring that all vehicles plying roads are road worthy at all times; 
 
(h)  Training and testing of applicants for driver’s license; 
 
(i)  Training and testing of applicants for Rider’s Card; 
 
(j)  Carrying out inspection and issuing report on accident vehicles in the State; 
 
(k)  Preparing and keeping statutory registers and a data base of all certificates issued and revoked. 
 
(2)  In the exercise of the functions of the Service, Vehicle Inspection Officers shall have powers to – 
 
(a)  Impound vehicles which fail to meet the prescribed standards; 
 
(b)  Direct that such vehicle is kept off the roads; 
 
(c)  Arrest  where  appropriate  and  allow  the  alleged offender  to  pay  the  fine  stipulated  for  the  offence 
under this Law. 
 
13  (1)  There shall be for the Service a Head of Department, who shall Staff of the 
 
(a)  Be an officer not below Grade Level 15 in the State Civil Service. 
 
(b)  Be responsible for the general administration and implementation of the policies of the Service; 
 
(c)  Be assisted in the discharge of his duties by such officers (who shall be designated Vehicle Inspection 
Officers) as he may require from time to time. 
 
14  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  in  this  Law,  all  cadres  of Transitional  Vehicle  Inspection  Officers  and 
other staff of the  Vehicle Inspection Unit Provisions relating shall be deemed to be staff of the  Service staff of the 
Service. 
 
15  Where  any  vehicle  is  found  plying  or  being  driven  or  used  on  any  highway without  Necessary  within  the  State 
without  the  prescribed  particulars,  any  Police  Officer  or Particulars  may  Vehicle  Inspection  Officer  may  impound 
the vehicle and cause it to be impounded removed to a vehicle park. 
 
16 (1) Any  person  entitled  to  the  custody  of  a  removed  vehicle  who impounded  within  twenty-four  hours  after  the 
vehicle  was  impounded,  tenders  to  the vehicle  to  officer  in  charge  of  the  vehicle  park  where  the  vehicle  is,  the 
following - 
 
(a)  Evidence,  that  the  officer  may  reasonably  require,  of his  entitlement  to  the  custody  of  the  removed 
vehicle which is in the park; and 
 
(b)  The  particulars  in  relation  to  that  vehicle  issued  prior  to  the impounding  of  the  vehicle,  shall  be 
entitled on demand at the park and without payment of any fees, save cost of removal, if any, to have 
the vehicle released to him at the park. 
 
(2)  Any person entitled to the custody of a removed vehicle who at any time after the said twenty-four hours but 
within  a  period  of  two  weeks from  the  date  on  which  the  vehicle  was  impounded  tenders  to  the  officer in 
charge of the removed vehicle park where the vehicle is, the following - 

(a)  Evidence as mentioned in subsection (1) (a) above; 
 
(b)  The necessary particulars in relation to the removed vehicle; and 
 
(c)  A revenue receipt for the cost of obtaining particulars in respect of the vehicle; shall upon payment to 
that  officer  of  a  fee  prescribed  in  Schedule II  to  this  Law  for  every  day  during  which  the  vehicle 
remains impounded (as charges for keeping the vehicle at the park) been titled on demand at the park 
to have his vehicle delivered up to him at the park: 
 
Provided however that if the necessary particulars in relation to that vehicle tendered by that person under the 
foregoing provisions of this subsection were issued prior to the impounding of the vehicle then paragraph (c) 
above shall not apply. 
 
(3)  Any  demand  under  this  Section  by  any  person  entitled  to  the custody  of  a  removed  vehicle  shall  be  made 
within the hours of eight (8) ’clock in the morning and six (6) o’clock in the evening on any week day (other 
than a public holiday). 
 
17 (1) Where any removed vehicle is not claimed in accordance with of Removed Section 16 within a period of one (1) 
month, the removed vehicle shall vest in the State Government. 
 
(2)  Where under  subsection  (1)  above  any  removed  vehicle  vests  in the  State  Government,  the  Authority  shall 
publish a notice of its intention to sell the abandoned or removed vehicle at the end of one (1) month from the 
date  of such publication in the  State Official Gazette  or one national news paper unless  within the  said one 
(1) month – 
 
(a)  Any motor vehicle licensing fees due in relation to that vehicle under any enactment; 
 
(b)  Any fees for driving licences due from the person who drove the vehicle when it was impounded; and 
 
(c)  Any appropriate charges; are paid to the licensing authorities in the State or, as the case may be, to the 
State by that person. 
 
(3)  If within the one (1) month specified in subsection (2) of this Section the removed vehicle is not claimed by 
the owner of the vehicle or by the person entitled to the custody of the  vehicle, the  Authority, or such other 
person as the Governor may authorize in that behalf, shall sell the vehicle by public auction. 
 
(4) The State Government shall not be under any duty to protect any removed vehicle and, in particular, shall not 
be  under  a  duty  to  protect  a removed  vehicle  from  damage  attributable  to  sun,  rain,  wind  or  other physical 
conditions. 
 
18  (1)  Any person who drives a motor vehicle on a Highway without due care and attention, or without reasonable 
consideration for other persons using the highway, shall be guilty of an offence and be liable on conviction to a fine 
of fifty thousand naira (₦50,000.00) or in the case of a second or subsequent conviction  to  a  fine  of  one  hundred 
naira (₦100,000.00) or to imprisonment for three (3) months or both.  
 
(2) where a person is charged with an offence under subsection (1) above and the Court is of the opinion that the 
offence  is  not  proved,  then  at  any  time  during the  hearing  or  immediately  after,  the  court  may,  without 
prejudice  to  any  other  power  exercisable  by  the  court,  direct  or  allow  a  charge  for  an  offence  under  this 
Section  to  be  preferred  forthwith  against  that  person  and  may  proceed  with  that  charge,  so  that  the  person 
charged or his counsel shall be informed of the new charge and be given an opportunity, whether by way of 
cross- examining any witness whose evidence has already been given against him or otherwise, of answering 
the  new charge and the  court  shall, if it considers that he  is prejudiced in his defence by  reason of  the new 
charge being so preferred, adjourn the hearing. 
 
19 (1) Any  person  who  drives  a  motor  vehicle  on  a  highway  recklessly  or  negligently,  or  at  a  speed  above  the 
stipulated limit or in a manner, which is dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances of the case 
including  the  nature,  condition,  and  the  use  of  the  high  way,  and  to  the  amount  of  traffic  which  actually  is  at  the 
time,  or  which  might  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  on  the  highway,  shall  be  liable  on  conviction  to  a  fine  of  one 
hundred thousand naira (₦100,000.00) or to imprisonment for two (2) years or both.  
 
(2) if upon the trial of a person for an offence under the provision of Section 20, the court is not satisfied that the 
person’s driving was the court of death is satisfied that he is guilty of driving as mentioned in the subsection 
(1) of this Section, the court may convict that the person of an offence under this Section 
 
20. Any  person  who  causes  the  death  of  another  person  by  driving  a  motor death  by  vehicle  recklessly,  or  at  a  speed 
above the stipulated limit which is Reckless or dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances of the 
case, dangerous including the nature, condition and use of the highway, street or other driving. Place and the amount 

of traffic in the vicinity at the time, or which might reasonably be expected to be in the vicinity, shall be guilty of an 
offence and liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term of seven (7) years. 
21  (1) Any person who when driving or attempting to drive, or when in vehicles when charge of a motor vehicle on a 
highway is under the influence of under Influence alcoholic drink or a drug to such an extent as to be incapable of 
having of  Alcohol or a  Drug. Proper control of such vehicle  shall be  liable  on conviction to a  fine  of one  hundred 
thousand naira (₦100,000.00) or to imprisonment for two (2) years or both. 
 
(2)  A  person  convicted  of  an  offence  under  Section  20,  21  and  (1)  shall,  unless  the  Court  for  special  reasons 
thinks  fit  to  order  otherwise,  and without  prejudice  to  the  power  of  the  Court  to  order  a  longer  period  of 
disqualification,  be  disqualified  for  a  period  of  twelve  (12)  months  from the  date  of  the  conviction  from 
holding or obtaining a driver’s licence. 
 
22  (1)  A  Police  Officer  or  an  officer  of  the  Authority  may  arrest  without warrant a  driver  of  a  motor  vehicle  on  a 
highway, who within his view commits an offence under Sections 20, 21 or 23 unless the driver either produces his 
licence to drive or produces other evidence of his identity acceptable to the Police. 
 
(2)  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  Law,  if  a  Police officer  or  an  officer  of  the  Authority  is  of  the      
opinion  on  reasonable grounds  that  there  may  be  difficulty  in  effecting  service  of  a  summons,  he may 
demand  and  retain  the  driver’s  licence  of  any  person  who  commits  or is  suspected  by  him  of  having 
committed an offence under this Law. 
 
(3)  Where a driver’s licence is retained, whether or not pursuant to this Section, the Police Officer or an Officer 
of the Authority retaining the licence shall give a written receipt for it and inform the person surrendering the 
licence of the name of the police station or office of the Authority at which it may be reclaimed. 
 
(4)  If  a  summons  in  respect  of  an  offence  under  this  Law  is  served  on the  person  whose  driving  licence  is 
retained  by  the  police  or  that  person appears  personally  at  the  nominated  police  station  or  office  of  the 
Authority not later than three (3) days after the retention of the driving licence he may have it returned to him 
on giving to the officer a receipt therefore duly signed and dated.  
 
23  Any person who– 
 
  (a)  Forges or fraudulently defaces, alters, mutilates, or adds anything to any licence or identification mark; 
 
(b)  Exhibits or uses any licence which has been forged, defaced, altered, mutilated or added to as aforesaid; 
 
(c)  Lends or allows to be used by any other person any licence or identification mark; 
 
(d)  uses a driving licence belonging to another person; 
 
(e)  Exhibits or uses any licence upon which figures or particulars have become illegible or; 
 
(f)  Exhibits or uses any colourable imitation, of any licence, shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
24  Any person who- 
 
 (a)  Drives or causes his vehicle to be driven along the Bus Transit, Sirens, etc. Rapid Transit (BRT) lane; 
 
(b)  Parks or causes a vehicle to be parked within fifteen (15) metres of any road intersection within the State; 
 
(c)  Uses or deploys siren or other noisy device in a vehicle; 
 
(d)  being a driver or conductor of a commercial  vehicle  fails to wear the  standard uniform as prescribed by the 
Ministry whilst engaged as a driver or conductor; 
 
(e)  Drives his vehicle on unauthorised routes; or 
 
(f)  Herds or allows cattle, sheep, goat, mule, pig or other beast of draught or burden to be on the highway, shall 
be guilty of an offence. 
 
25  Any person who drives or, being the owner, permits any other person to drive on a highway a motor vehicle which 
 
(a) Is not registered or licensed; or 
 
(b)  Does not have affixed to it an identification mark in the prescribed manner, shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
26.  Where in any accident due to the use of any motor vehicle or trailer on a highway any injury is caused to any person, 
property or livestock in charge of any person, the driver of the motor vehicle shall – 

 
(a)  Immediately stop the vehicle; 
 
(b)  furnish his name and address, the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, the identification mark of the 
vehicle, and other particulars relating to it if requested; 
 
(i) Any person to whom the injury has been caused ; 
 
(ii)  The owner or person in charge of the property or of the livestock to which the injury has been caused; 
or 
 
(iii)  An officer of the Authority. 
 
(c)  Where the person to whom injury has been caused so request, or if he is unconscious or if the injury caused 
to that person appears to endanger life, take all - 
 
(i)  Reasonable practicable steps to attend to the injured person; 
 
(ii)  Procure medical attention; 
 
(iii)  Take him to a hospital where necessary; 
 
(iv)  Report the accident immediately to the nearest police station; and 
 
(v)  the nearest office of the Authority. 
 
(d)  In every other case, report the accident as soon as possible within twenty-four (24) hours of the occurrence of 
the accident to the nearest police station, or to the nearest office of the Authority. 
 
27  (1) Any person who under the provisions of this Law or Regulations made there under –to an Officer. 
 
(a)  Commits or is alleged to have committed an offence; 
 
(b)  Refuses to give his name, address or such other information as may be demanded; 
 
(c) Gives false name, address or other false information is guilty of an offence. 
 
(2)  The owner of any motor vehicle shall, on demand by any Police officer or an officer of the Authority, give all 
information  which  it  is within  his  power  to  give  as  to  the  name,  address,  description,  antecedents and 
whereabouts  of  any  person  who  commits  or  is  alleged  to  have committed  any  offence  in  respect  of  or  with 
any such motor vehicle or trailer and shall also give similar information regarding any occupants of the motor 
vehicle  or  trailer  at  the  time  of  the  offence  or  alleged  offence and  if  such  owner  fails  to  do  so  he  shall  be 
guilty of an offence. 
 
28 Any  Police  Officer  or  an  officer  of  the  Authority  may  apprehend  without of  offender  warrant  any  person  who 
commits within his view, or whom he reasonably refusing to Give suspects of having committed, an offence under 
this Law or the name. Regulations made hereunder – 
 
(a)  If such person refuses or fails to produce his driver’s licence on demand; 
 
(b)  If such person refuses to  give his  name and address or gives a  name  and address  which  may reasonably be 
suspected to be false; or 
 
(c)  If any vehicle driven by such person does not bear the prescribed number plates or identification mark. 
 
29  (1) Subject to the provisions  of this  Law, any Police  Officer or an officer of the Authority may retain the driver’s 
licence of any person who Licence in commits an offence in his presence, or whom he reasonably suspects of certain 
having committed an offence  under this  Law or the Regulations  made circumstances there under, if  he reasonably 
considers that any difficulty is likely to arise in the service of summons on such person. 
 
(2)  A  Police  Officer  or  an  officer  of  the  Authority  who  retains  the driver’s licence of any person under this 
Section shall give to him a written statement signed and dated by the officer to the effect that the licence has 
been  so  retained  and  indicating  the  police  station  or  office of  the  Authority  at  which  the  licence  may  be 
claimed. 
 
(3)  A driver’s licence retained under this Section shall be returned to the  holder  upon  his  giving  a  written 
acknowledgement signed and dated by him to the effect that it has been so returned – 
 

(a)  if  he  reports  in  person  not  less  than  three  days  after  the  date of  its  retention,  at  the  police  station 
mentioned in the written statement given in accordance with Subsection (2); or 
 
(b)  If a summons relating to the offence committed or suspected to have been committed by him is served 
on him. 
 
30  Where  a  person  is  convicted  of  an  offence  in  respect  of  the  overloading  of commercial  a  commercial  vehicle  or 
trailer or of driving a commercial vehicle at a vehicle liable speed exceeding that provided by law, then in addition 
to the person in certain driving the vehicle at the time of the commission of the offence, if such cases of person not 
being  the  owner  of  the  vehicle,  the  owner  of  such  vehicle  shall overloading  also  be  liable,  and  may  be  charged 
accordingly. 
 
Provided that such owner shall not be convicted of the offence if he can prove to the satisfaction of the Court that no 
act or omission on his part was contributory to the commission of the offence. 
 
31  Where a person is convicted of an offence relating to the condition of a commercial motor vehicle then in addition to 
the person convicted, the vehicle Liable owner, if such person is not the owner, shall also be guilty of the offence in 
certain unless he  can prove  to the  satisfaction of the  court that  he  was not aware cases if vehicle  and could not by 
reasonable inquiry have been aware that the vehicle did is not safe not comply with requirements of the law relating 
to the condition of the vehicle. 
 
32  Any  person  who  uses  a  motor  vehicle  or  trailer  for  a  purpose  other  than of  terms  of  Licence  that  for  which  it  is 
licensed shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
33 Nothing  in  this  Law  shall  affect  any  liability  of  the  driver  or  owner  of  a liabilities motor  vehicle  under  any  other 
enactment or at Common Law. 
 
34  Where a commercial vehicle or trailer is in the custody or under the a third Party control of any person other than the 
owner or some person employed by the owner then that person in addition to the owner shall be liable under Section 
31 unless such person can prove to the satisfaction of the Court that he  was not aware and could not by reasonable 
inquiry have been aware that the vehicle did not comply with the requirements of the law relating to the condition of 
the vehicle. 
 
35  The  owner or driver of a  motor vehicle or of an articulated vehicle  shall not by reason of the  vehicle  having been 
registered or licensed by a licensing authority be relieved of any responsibility for its road worthiness and fitness for 
the purpose for which it is being used. 
 
36  (1) Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Law for which no specific penalty is provided 
commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction as follows – 
 
(a)  As a first offender to a fine of twenty thousand Naira (₦20,000.00); 
 
(b)  As  a  subsequent  offender  to  a  fine  of  thirty  thousand  Naira (₦30,  000.00)  or  to  imprisonment  for  a 
term of three (3) years or both. 
 
(2)  In addition to any penalty that may be provided for failure to comply with any provision of this Law or the 
Lagos  State  Traffic Management  Authority  Law,  where  such  failure  occurs,  the  vehicle  may, upon 
conviction, be forfeited to the State. 
 
(3)  In sentencing a person convicted of committing an offence under this Law, the Court may, in addition to or in 
lieu  of  the  prescribed sentence, direct the suspension or revocation of the driver’s licence, and order  the 
person convicted to- 
 
(a)  Render community service  in accordance  with the  provision of Section 347 of the Administration of 
Criminal Justice Law 2011; 
 
(b)  enrol for and attend courses of the Lagos State Drivers’ Institute for a period of not less than 7 days, at 
his cost; or 
 
(c)  To both community service and enrolment in the Lagos State Drivers’ Institute. 
 
37  (1) As from the commencement of this Law, no Officer shall demand, receive, will fully condones, connives or abet 
with any person gratification in cash or kind from any person to circumvent the provision of this Law. 
 
(2)  Any Officer who contravenes the provision of Subsection (1) above shall be liable to summary dismissal and 
prosecution under the Criminal Justice Administration Law. 
 

38 (1) The Commissioner may in accordance with the Regulations Approval Law Cap. R5 Vol. 6 Laws of Lagos State 
2003make regulations to- 
 
(a)  Determine  and  regulate  the  size,  shape  and  character  of the  identification  marks  and  the  manner  in 
which they shall be fixed to motor vehicles and trailers and rendered easily distinguishable; 
 
(b)  Register of motor vehicles, the particulars to be entered in the register, and the fees to be paid; 
 
(c)  Notify of a change in the ownership of a motor vehicle or trailer and as to its registration thereafter; 
 
(d)  Prescribe  the  different types of licences  which  may be issued for motor vehicles and the  purpose  for 
which vehicles so licensed may be used; 
 
(e)  Prescribe the fees to be paid for licensing motor vehicles or for any class or description of vehicles; 
 
(f)  Prescribe  conditions  relating  to  the  purposes  for  which stage  carriages  may  be  used  and  the  hours 
during which they may ply for hire and other matters which shall be deemed to be attached to licences 
issued  in  respect  of  such  vehicles,  and  empowering licensing  authorities  to  issue  any  such  licence 
subject to such further conditions as they may think fit to impose and endorse on the licence; 
 
(g)  The number of persons and the goods which may be carried in hackney and stage carriages; 
 
(h)  Require  stage carriages designed for the  sole  purpose  of carrying persons and their hand luggage  to 
carry a conductor; 
 
(i)  Prohibit  persons  from  driving  hackney  and  stage carriages,  or  from  acting  as  conductors  on  stage 
carriages, unless they wear badges issued by the relevant authority, and in the case of conductors, are 
registered  by  a the  relevant  authority,  and  requiring the  surrender  of  such  badges  in  cases  where  the 
licensing authority considers the holder to be unsuitable to drive a hackney or stage carriage or to be a 
conductor on a stage carriage, as the case may be, and prescribing the fees for such badges and for the 
registration of conductors; 
 
(j)  Prescribe  areas  within  which  hackney  and  carriages  are  not to  operate  unless  they  conform  to  the 
special requirements applicable to such areas; 
 
(k)  Prescribe  the  constructional  and  mechanical  requirements for  hackney  carriages,  stage  carriages  and 
commercial vehicles; 
 
(l)  Empower  licensing  authorities,  singly  or  in  combination, to  fix  the  maximum  and  minimum  fares 
which may be charged in the case of hackney and stage carriages; 
 
(m)  Empower any authority to – 
 
(i)  Fix time table for stage carriages on any route; 
  
(ii)  Determine stopping times at stands and stopping places; 
 
(iii)  Determine  the  days and hours during  which stage carriages  may ply for hire  on any specified 
route; 
 
(iv)  Require  the  fitting  to  hackney  carriages  of  meters  or other  similar  devices  to  indicate 
authorized fares; 
 
(v)  Provide for the additional examination of hackney and stage carriage drivers before the issue of 
a badge. 
 
(n)  Examine applicants for drivers’ licences and as to the licences and permits which may be granted and 
the  fees  to be  paid  and  providing  for  the  taking  and  recording  of  the  fingerprint impressions  of  all 
drivers; 
 
(o) Prohibit  or  restrict  the  driving  of  motor  vehicles  or any  class or  description  of  motor  vehicle  on  any 
specified  highway or  part  of  a  highway  or  empowering  any  specified  officer  or  other authority  to 
impose such prohibitions or restrictions; 
 
(p)  The construction of motor vehicles and trailers and the conditions under which they may be used; 
 
(q)  With respect to the speed at which motor vehicles or any class or description of motor vehicle may be 
driven either generally or on any specified highway or within any defined area or place; 

 
(r)  Prescribe precautions to be taken in the interest of the safety and convenience of the public travelling 
in  motor  vehicles  or otherwise  using  highways,  and  providing  for  the  periodical inspection  of  motor 
vehicles; 
 
(s)  Provide in respect of drivers of commercial vehicles – 
 
(i)  The hours that they may be employed without a rest; and 
 
(ii)  the periods of rest from driving or other employment which must be allowed, differentiating, if 
necessary, between  day  and  night  and  between  drivers  who  are required  only  to  drive  the 
vehicle and those who have other duties to perform in addition to driving; 
 
(t)  Exempt or authorize  any specified officer or other authority to exempt from all or any of the  provisions of 
this Law or of any regulations made hereunder – 
 
(i)  Any specified class or description of motor vehicle or trailer; 
 
(ii)  Motor vehicles or trailers belonging to any particular class of persons; 
 
(iii)  Any specified areas; or 
 
(iv)  Any  specified  class  or  description  of  person  in  the service  of  the  State  and  prescribing  any 
conditions of such exemptions. 
 
(u)  Give effect to the fulfilment of international requirements; 
 
(v)  The issuance of international certificates for motor vehicles and international driving permits; 
 
(w)  Fix  the  fees  to  be  paid  for  certificates,  permits  and  other documents  issued  in  connection  with 
international requirement; 
 
(x)  The compulsory examination of any type of motor vehicle or trailer or any class or description thereof 
and the places and manner of such examination; 
 
(y)  The appointment of examiners of motor vehicles and trailers or any class or description thereof; 
 
(i)  The payment of fees for such examination by the owners of such vehicles; and 
 
(ii) The duties and powers of such examiners in regard to such examination. 
 
(z)  For  the  cancellation  or  suspension  of  any  licence  issued  in respect  of  any  motor  vehicle  or  trailer 
which  since  the  issue  of  the licence  is  in  such  a  condition  as  to  be  a  source  of  danger  to  persons 
travelling  in  the  vehicle  or  trailer  or  to  other  users  of  the  roads  or  to cause  damage  to  the  roads 
themselves; 
 
(aa)  prescribe penalties for the breach or contravention of any regulation made under this Law; 
 
(bb)  prescribe fees and charges; 
 
(cc)  prescribe  anything  which  is  to  be  prescribed  and  generally for  the  better  carrying  out  of  the 
purposes and provisions of this Law; 
 
(dd)  specify the routes to be followed by vehicles, animals and pedestrians; 
 
(ee)  determine the line to be kept by persons driving or in charge of or riding any vehicle or animal 
on any highway; 
 
(ff)  prohibit  or  restrict  the  use  of  any  specified  highway  by vehicles  of  any  specified  class  or 
description; 
 
(gg)  prohibit  the  driving  or  propelling  of  vehicles  on  any specified  highway  otherwise  than  in  a 
specified direction; 
 
(hh)  specify  parking  places,  and  the  days  and  hours  during which  and  the  maximum  periods  for 
which they may be used and fees, if any, to be imposed; 
 
(ii)  Prohibit vehicles waiting on any specified highway; 

 
(jj)  specify routes to be followed and the stopping places to be used by stage carriages; 
 
(kk)  appoint stands for hackney and stage carriages and the days and hours during which they may 
be used; 
 
(ll)  prohibit  the  sounding  of  horns,  sirens  or  other  similar appliances  either  in  general  or  during 
specified hours or in respect of specified areas; 
 
(mm)  regulate the conduct of persons driving, or propelling or in charge of or riding any vehicle or 
animal on a highway; and 
 
(nn)  generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the purposes of this Law and for traffic control 
and vehicle inspection. 
 
39 The provisions of this Law shall also apply to vehicles and persons in the of the Law public service of the State, and 
for  the  purpose  of  proceedings  for  an to  Public  Officers  offence  in  connection  with  any  such  Vehicle  against any 
person other than the driver of the vehicle, the person nominated in that behalf by the department in whose service 
the vehicle is used shall be deemed to be the person actually responsible unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the 
court that the driver only was responsible. 
 
40 From the commencement of this Law, it shall be an offence- 
 
41  In this Law unless the context otherwise requires- 
 
“Authority” means the Lagos State Traffic Management Authority established under Section 1 of the 
Lagos State Traffic Management Authority Law; 
 
“Axle Weight” means in relation to an axle of a heavy motor vehicle or of a trailer the aggregate weight 
transmitted to the surface beneath by the several wheels attached to that axle, when the 
heavy motor vehicle or the trailer is loaded; 
 
“Articulated Vehicle” means  a  motor  vehicle  with  a  trailer  which  is so  constructed  and  by  partial  super-
imposition  attached  to  the motor  vehicle  that  a  substantial  part  of  the  weight  of  the 
trailer is borne by the motor vehicle; 
 
“Appropriate Charges” in relation to a removed vehicle of any class means such sum as the Commissioner may 
by order specify as regards vehicles of that class;  
 
“Commercial vehicle” means  a  hackney  carriage,  a  stage  carriage, a  tractor,  and  any  motor  vehicle primarily 
designed  for  the  carriage of  goods  or  passengers,  excluding  any  such  vehicle  used 
exclusively for carrying the personal effects of the owner; 
 
“Commissioner” means Commissioner for Transportation or any member of the State Executive Council 
being in charge of transportation in the State; 
 
“Gross Weight” means  the  net  weight  of  the  vehicle  with  the weight  of  freight  or  load  (including  the 
driver and crew)  which such  vehicle  is designed to carry and registered as such by the 
licensing authority; 
 
“Hackney Carriage” means any motor vehicle designed or constructed to carry not more than seven persons, 
used or intended to be used for carrying passengers for hire or reward under a contract 
expressed or implied for the use of the vehicle as a whole at or for a fixed or agreed rate 
or sum; 
 
“Highway” includes any roadway to which the public have access to and is controlled by the State;. 
 
“Intersection” means  a  place  where  two  or  more  roads  pass  across each  other  and  or  converge  and 
includes a T-junction; 
 
“Ministry” means Ministry of Transportation; 
 
“Motorcycle” means a motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than two  wheels, and includes a 
combination of a motorcycle and side car; 
 
“Motor Vehicle” means a mechanically propelled vehicle intended or adapted for use on roads; 
 

“Owner “ means  the  person  by  whom  the  vehicle  is  kept  and  used and,  in  relation  to  a  vehicle 
which  is  subject to  a  hiring  agreement or  hire  purchase  agreement,  means  the  person 
keeping or using the vehicle under that agreement, and the expression 
 
“Ownership” shall be construed accordingly; 
 
“Parking Place” means a place where vehicles may be left or allowed to remain stationary; 
 
“Prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made by the Commissioner. 
 
“Prescribed Particulars” means in  relation  to  any  vehicle,  the driving licence of the driver thereof, the rider’s 
card,  the  vehicle registration,  the  vehicle  licence,  roadworthiness  certificate, certificate 
of insurance of the vehicle, hackney carriage licence, and stage carriage licence or any 
other document required by law to be obtained in relation to the vehicle. 
 
“Stage Carriage” means any motor vehicle used or intended to be used for carrying passengers for hire or 
reward other than such a vehicle constructed or adapted to carry less than eight persons, 
the passengers  paying  separate  and  distinct  fares  or  at  the  rate  of separate  or  distinct 
fares  for  their  respective  places,  and  shall  be deemed  to  include  the  expression 
“omnibus” 
 
“Task Force” means the committee of persons appointed by the State Governor to remove abandoned 
vehicles from the High ways or near private premises 
 
“Trailer” means a vehicle drawn by any motor vehicle but does not include a side-car attached to 
a motor-cycle; 
 
“Traffic Sign” includes  all  signals,  warning sign  posts,  direction posts,  signs  or  other  devices  for  the 
guidance or direction of persons using highways; 
 
“Vehicle” means  carriages,  wagons,  carts,  motor  vehicles, motorcycles,  tricycles,  vans,  Lorries, 
trailers, hand carts,  sledges, trucks, barrows, and all other  machines  for the carriage  of 
goods or persons. 
 
42 The Road Traffic Law Cap. R10. Vol.7 Laws of Lagos State 2003 as amended is repealed 
 
43 This Law may be cited as the Lagos State Road Traffic Law 2012 and commencement shall come into force on the 
2
nd
 day of August 2012. 
 
 
  

Schedule I 
Traffic Offences and Penalties 
 
S/N Offence Points Fine Additional 
     
1. Violation of routes by commercial 
vehicles 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
2. Non-display of route and routes number 
on vehicle 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
3. Disobeying traffic control  personnel 2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00 subsequent 
offender - N30,000.00 
Impound vehicle 
 
4. Parking on yellow line on any public 
highway/illegal parking 
4 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
5. Parking on yellow line on any public 
highway/ illegal parking (trailer) 
4 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
6. Vehicle crossing double yellow 
line/centre line 
4 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
7. Staying within the yellow junction box 
(offside rule) 
3 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
8. Failure to yield to right of way of 
pedestrians at a Zebra crossing 
3 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
9. Failure to give way to traffic on the left at 
a roundabout 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
10. Smoking while driving 2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
11. Riding motorcycle without crash helmet 
for rider. 
1 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Imprisonment for 
a term of six (6) 
months, or both 
fine and 
imprisonment 
12. Riding a motorcycle without rider’s 
permit 
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Impound 
motorcycle 
13. Riding a motorcycle  
i. Against traffic 
ii.On the kerb, median or road set backs 
3 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Impound 
motorcycle 
14. Conveying more than one passenger at 
any given time  
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Imprisonment for 
a term of six (6) 
months, or both 
fine and 
imprisonment 
15. Installation of musical gadget on a 
motorcycle  
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Impound the set 
16. Alteration of manufacturer’s specification 
on motorcycle (e.g. Handle bar/leg)  
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
17. Motorcyclist resisting arrest  1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
18. Operating motorcycle without side 
mirrors, trafficators, 
break light or rear lights 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
19. Motorcycle operator carrying:  
i. Pregnant woman subsequent offender-  
ii. Adult with baby N30, 000.00 iii. Child 
below the age of twelve (12) years 
 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Imprisonment for 
a term of three (3) 
years, or both fine 
and imprisonment 
20. Under aged person (under 18yrs old) 
riding a motorcycle 
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Dislodge rider 
21. Motorcycle operating using horn designed 
for motor 
vehicles  
1 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Remove Horn 
22. Operating a Motorcycle in a restricted 
area or on prohibited route  
 
3 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Impound 
motorcycle 
23. Exceeding prescribed speed limit  
 
2 N100,000.00 Imprisonment for 
a term of one (1) 
year, or both fine 

and imprisonment 
24. Tailgating an emergency vehicle 
 
3 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
25. Failure of slow moving vehicle to keep to 
the right lane  
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
26. Assault on a officer(physical)  
 
3 N100,000.00 Imprisonment for 
a term of three (3) 
years, or both fine 
and imprisonment 
27. Driving in a direction  prohibited by the 
Road Traffic Law/Neglect of Traffic 
Directions  
 
4 Forfeiture of vehicle to the State 1
st
 offender-one 
(1) year 
Imprisonment and 
forfeiture of the 
vehicle to the 
State. 
2
nd
 and 
subsequent 
offender- three (3) 
years 
Imprisonment and 
forfeiture of the 
vehicle to 
the State and shall 
have 
their data and 
biometric 
captured. 
28. Illegal U-turns 3 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Driver Training 
29. Wrongful overtaking of other vehicle 2 N100,000.00  
30. Overloading of a commercial vehicle on 
the highway 
4 N50,000.00 Dislodge Excess 
31. Driving on the walkway or kerbs 4 N50,000.00  
32. Parking on the walkway or kerbs 3 N20,000.00  
33. Parking or stopping to pick passengers by 
a commercial vehicle on the highway 
3 N20,000.00 Driver Training 
34. Bullion van driving in a direction 
prohibited by the Road Traffic law 
 
5 Forfeiture of vehicle Imprisonment for 
a term of three (3) 
years, 
35. Abandoned vehicle on highway 2 N50,000.00. Cost of towing  
36. Vehicle causing obstruction on highway if 
broken down 
2 N50,000.00. Cost of towing  
37. Commuter or Conductor hanging on 
tailboard of moving vehicle 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Dislodge and 
Sanction Driver 
38. Driving vehicles with doors left open  
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
39. Making or receiving phone calls when 
driving without 
hands free  
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
40. Counting money, otherwise engaged in 
other 
activities when driving 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
41. Driving without strapped seat belt for 
both driver and passengers 
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Strap on seat belt 
42. Failure to display reflective warning sign 
at point of break down  
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
43. Motorist resisting arrest 2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
 
44. Use of BRT lite corridor 3 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - N30,000.00 
Imprisonment for 
a term of three (3) 
years, or both fine 
and imprisonment 
45. Wilful Obstruction on highway 2 N50,000.00; Cost of towing Imprisonment for 
a term of one (1) 

 
In addition to the prescribed above, the Authority may direct the driver/rider to attend the Lagos State Driver’s Institute for 
training and re-orientation. 
 
  
year, or both fine 
and imprisonment 
46. Storage charge for impounded cars, jeep 
and mini-buses per day 
 N1,000.00  
47. Storage charge for impounded 
motorcycles and 3 wheelers per day 
 N500.00  
48. Storage charge for all other impounded 
vehicles (6 wheelers and above per day) 
 N2,000.00  
49. Towing an impounded car, jeep and mini 
buses 
 N10,000.00  
50. Towing other commercial vehicles 
excluding trailers (mini-buses) 
 N10,000.00  
51. Towing a Trailer or Tanker(empty)  N50,000.00  
52. Towing a trailer or Tanker (loaded)  N100,000.00  
53. Towing tippers and lorries (loaded)  N50,000.00  
54. Towing luxurious buses   N50,000.00  
55. Towing an overnight breakdown (Trailer)  N100,000.00  
56. Towing tricycles   N2,000.00  
57. Towing Motorcycles   N500.00  
58. Hire of Heavy duty recovery equipment 
(Towing /Recovery fees) 
 
  At hirer’s cost 
59. Failure to pay Penalty within prescribed 
time 
  Double the initial 
penalty 

Schedule II 
(Section 3) 
 
Prohibited Routes for Motorcycle and Tricycle 
 
Major Highways in Lagos 
 
1.  Lagos – Ibadan Expressway 
 
2.  Apapa – Oshodi Expressway 
 
3.  Oworonshoki – Oshodi Expressway 
 
4.  Lagos – Ikorodu Expressway 
 
5.  Lagos – Abeokuta Expressway 
 
6.  Third Mainland Bridge 
 
7.  Eti–Osa/Lekki – Epe Expressway 
 
8.  Lagos – Badagry Expressway 
 
9.  Funsho Williams Avenue 
 
10.  Agege Motor Road 
 
11.  Eti-Osa/Lekki Coastal Road 
 
 
 
List of Bridges in the State 
 
1. Iyana- Ipaja Bridge Agege Alimosho Local Government Areas 
2. Dopemu Bridge Agege Alimosho Local Government Areas 
3. Airport/Ikeja Bridge Ikeja Local Government Area 
4. Agege Motor Road/Oshodi Loop, Oshodi Ikeja/ Mushin Local Government Areas 
5. Mushin/Isolo Link Bridge  Mushin/ Oshodi – Isolo Local Government 
Areas 
6. Dorman Long Bridge Surulere/ Lagos Mainland Local Government 
Areas 
7. Ojuelegba Bridge Surulere Local Government Area 
8. National Stadium Flyover Surulere Local Government Area 
9. Iganmu/ Funsho Williams Bridge Surulere Local Government Area 
10. Apapa – Iganmu Bridge Surulere Local Government Area 
11. Apapa- Ijora Link Bridge Apapa/ Lagos Mainland Local Government 
Areas 
12. Liverpool Bridge, Apapa Apapa Local Government Area 
 
13. Mile 2 Bridge- Loop, Amuwo- Odofin  Amuwo. - Odofin Local Government Area 
14. Okota (Cele)/Ijesha Link Bridge Mushin/ Oshodi - Isolo Local Government 
Areas 
15. Apakun/Apapa- Oshodi Bridge  
Network Areas 
Mushin / Oshodi - Isolo Local Government 
16. Ikorodu Road/Anthony Clover leaf  
Bridge 
Somolu/ Ikeja Local Government Areas 
17. Trade Fair Flyover Bridge Ojo Local Government Area 
18. FESTAC/Amuwo –Odofin Link Bridge Amuwo - Odofin Local Government Area 
19. Flyover Bridges along Alhaji Masha  
Road 
Surulere Local Government Area 
20. Ojota Clover leaf Bridge  Kosofe/ Ikeja Local Government Areas 
21. Ogudu Bridge Kosofe Local Government Area 
22. 3
rd
  Mainland Bridge Lagos Island/Lagos Mainland/Somolu Local 
Government Areas 
23. Maryland flyover  Ikeja/Somolu Local Government Areas 
24. Ikeja General Hospital flyover Bridge Ikeja Local Government Area 
25. Kodesoh Bridge, Oba Akran, Ikeja Ikeja Local Government Area 

26. Opebi Link Bridge Ikeja Local Government Area 
27. Sheraton- Opebi Bridge Ikeja Local Government Area 
28. Jibowu/Yaba flyover Bridge Lagos Mainland Local Government Area 
29. Carter Bridge, Lagos Lagos Island/ Lagos Mainland Local 
Government Areas 
30 Bariga – Ifako Bridge Somolu/ Kosofe Local Government Areas 
31 Apapa-Oshodi Expressway/ Alapere Bridge Somolu/ Kosofe Local Government Areas 
32 Bariga/Oworonshoki Bridge Somolu/ Kosofe Local Government Areas 
33 Apapa - Oshodi Expressway/  
Gbagada U-Turn 
Somolu/ Kosofe Local Government Areas 
34 Apapa - Oshodi Expressway/ 3
rd
  Mainland 
Bridge 
Somolu/ Kosofe Local Government Areas 
35 3
rd
  Mainland/Oworonshoki Bridge Kosofe Local Government Area 
36 Eko Bridge Lagos Island / Lagos Mainland Local 
Government Areas 
37 Apongbon flyover, Bridge Lagos Island Local Government Area 
38 Cowry Bridge (Officers Mess) Lagos Island / Eti- Osa Local Government 
Areas 
39 Mcwen Bridge (Bonny Camp) Eti- Osa Local Government Area 
40 Marina / Ikoyi Bridge  
 
Lagos Island / Eti- Osa Local Government 
Areas 
41 Ikoyi/ Obalende Bridge Eti- Osa Local Government Area 
 
 
Agege Local Government Area 
 
1.  Oba Ogunji Road 
 
2.  Old Abeokuta Road 
 
3.  Capitol Road 
 
4  Alfa Nla Road 
 
5.  Oko-Oba Road 
 
6.  Akilo Street 
 
7.  Agunbiade Road 
 
8.  Ogba Road 
 
9.  Ipaja Road 
 
10.  Moricas Road 
 
11.  Oyewole Road 
 
12.  Arigbanla Street 
 
13.  Dopemu Road 
 
14.  Oke-Koto Junction 
 
15.  Oniwaya Road 
 
16.  Adebisi Awosoga Street 
 
17.  Old Ota Road 
 
18.  Ijaiye Road 
 
19.  Akin Doherty Road 
 
20.  Amoo Street 
 
21.  Pen Cinema Roundabout 

 
22.  Surulere Street 
 
23.  Agbedeyi Street 
 
24.  Ayige Street 
 
25.  Sule Street 
 
26.  Ashipa Street 
 
27.  Salawu Street 
 
 
Ajeromi-Ifelodun Local Government Area 
 
1.  Baale Adeyemo Street 
 
2.  Mba/Cardoso Street up to Oto Wharf 
 
3.  Mobil Road up to Boundary Road 
 
4.  Boundary Road-Aiyeke Bridge-Tolu Bus/Stop 
 
5.  Wilmer Crescent 
 
6.  Industrial Road 
 
7.  Achapo Road/New Road 
 
8.  Idewu Street 
 
9.  Baale Adeyemo Road 
 
10.  Malu/Mobil Road 
 
11.  Ojo Road 
 
12.  Cemetery/Mosafejo/Alaba Road 
 
13.  Bakare-Faro Road 
 
 
Apapa Local Government Area 
 
1.  Creek Road 
 
2.  Wharf Road 
 
3.  Burma Road 
 
4.  Randle Road 
5.  Marine Road 
 
6.  Kofo Abayomi Road 
 
7.  Liverpool Road 
 
8.  Point Road 
 
9.  Park Lane 
 
10.  Itapeju Avenue 
 
11.  Entire Network of Roads in Apapa G.R.A 
 
12.  Dock Yard Road 
 

13.  Oduduwa Road 
 
14.  Ladipo Oluwole Road 
 
15.  Bonny Road 
 
16.  Commercial Road 
 
17.  Malu/Mobil Road 
 
18.  Warehouse Road 
 
19.  Orile-Iganmu Road 
 
 
Alimosho Local Government Area 
 
1. Ipaja – Ayobo Road 
 
2.  Ekoro Road 
 
3.  Egbeda – Idimu Road 
 
4.  Egbeda-Akowonjo Road 
 
5.  Iyana-Ipaja-Idimu Road 
 
6.  Idimu-Ikotun Road 
 
7.  Lasu-Iba Road 
 
8.  Ikotun-Egbe Road 
 
9.  Ipaja Road 
 
10.  Igando Road 
 
11.  Egbe –Idimu Road 
 
12.  Old Ota Road 
 
13.  Meiran Road 
 
14.  Ayobo Road 
 
15.  Ajasa/Command Road 
 
16.  Baruwa Road 
 
17.  Liasu Road 
 
18.  Governor’s Road 
 
19.  Abaranje Road 
 
20.  Ijegun Road 
 
21.  Shasha Road 
 
22.  Baruwa/Aina Obembe Road 
 
23.  Adefemi Road, Ipaja 
 
24.  Goye 
 
 
Amuwo – Odofin Local Government Area 
 

1.  Oshodi-Apapa Expressway 
 
2.  Durbar Road/Asiwaju Bola Tinubu Road 
 
3.  The Entire Network of Roads in Festac Town 
 
4.  Circular Road 
 
5.  The Entire Network of Roads in Zones A,B,C & D of Amuwo-Odofin 
Low - Cost Housing Estate 
 
6.  Old Ojo Road 
 
7.  Mumuni Adio Badmus Way 
 
8.  Lagos Badagry Expressway 
 
 
Badagry Local Government Area 
 
1.  Lagos – Badagry Expressway from Eric Moore to Seme Road 
 
2.  Badagry Roundabout to Topo Road 
 
3.  Joseph Dosu Road 
 
 
Central Business District (CBD) Roads 
 
1.  Inner Marina 
 
2.  Broad Street 
 
3.  Nnamdi Azikwe Street 
 
4.  King George V Road 
 
5.  Idumagbo Avenue 
 
6.  Outer Marina 
 
7.  Adeniji Adele Street 
 
8.  Martins Street 
 
9.  Balogun Street 
 
10.  Odunlami Street 
 
11.  Ereko Street 
 
12.  New Balogun Street 
 
13.  Campbell Street 
 
14.  Breadfruit Street 
 
15.  Abibu Oki Street 
 
16.  Davies Street 
 
17.  Kakawa Street 
 
18.  Force Road 
 
19.  Oloto/Fosbery Road 
 
 

Epe Local Government Area 
 
1.  Femi Agbalajobi Road 
 
2.  Ayetoro Road 
 
3.  Hospital Road 
 
4.  Marina Road 
 
5.  Central Mosque Road 
 
6.  Kasali Oluwo Street 
 
7.  Ekundayo Street 
 
8.  Lagos Road 
 
9.  Ijebu to Itoikin Road from Agbowa to Itoikin 
 
10.  Omu- Ijebu to Ketu Roundabout 
 
11.  Ketu Roundabout to Ejinrin Town 
 
12.  Ota Road 
 
13.  Olofin Road 
 
14.  Orugbo – Ido Road 
 
15.  Agbowa-Ikosi Road 
 
16.  Ketu Roundabout to Epe 
 
17.  Ketu Roundabout – Itoikin 
 
 
Eti-Osa Local Government Area 
 
1.  The Entire Network of Roads and Bridges in Ikoyi/Obalende and Iru/ 
Victoria Island Local Council Development Areas 
 
2.  Eti-Osa/Lekki-Epe Expressway 
 
 
 
Ifako-Ijaiye Local Government Area / Ojokoro Local Council Development Area 
 
1.  Ogunnusi Road 
 
2.  Lateef Jakande Road 
 
3.  College Road 
 
4.  Jonathan Coker Street 
 
5.  Iju Road 
 
6.  WEMPCO Road 
 
7.  ACME Road 
 
8.  New Oko-Oba Road 
 
9.  Lagos Abeokuta Expressway 
 
10.  Agbado Road 
 

11.  Baale Animashaun Road 
 
12.  Yaya Abatan Road 
 
 
Ikeja Local Government Area 
 
1.  Lagos Ibadan Expressway (from Lagos Boundary to Lagos – Toll gate) 
 
2.  Sheraton Link Bridge 
 
3.  Oba Akran Avenue 
 
4.  Obafemi Awolowo Way 
 
5.  Kudirat Abiola Road 
 
6.  Mobolaji Bank-Anthony Way 
 
7.  Lateef Jakande Road 
 
8.  Nurudeen Olowopopo Drive 
 
9.  Otunba Jobi Fele Way 
 
10.  Allen Avenue 
 
11.  Opebi Road 
 
12.  Secretariat Road 
 
13.  Mobolaji Johnson Road 
 
14.  Osho Street 
 
15.  Hakeem Balogun Road 
 
16.  IPM Way 
 
17.  Ashabi Cole Street 
 
18.  Toyin Street 
 
19.  Entire Ikeja GRA Road Network 
 
20.  ACME Road 
 
21.  WEMPCO Road 
 
22.  Oduduwa Road 
 
23.  Isaac John Street 
 
24.  Alausa Secretariat Perimeter Road Network 
 
25.  Simbiat Abiola Road 
 
26.  Kaffi Street 
 
27.  Opebi Link Bridge 
 
28.  Ikosi Road 
 
29.  Adeniyi Jones Avenue 
 
30.  Entire Alausa CBD 
 
31.  Ladipo Oluwole Avenue 

 
32.  ASBFI Road 
 
33.  Olowu Street 
 
34.  Ola Ayinde Street 
 
35.  Unity Road 
 
36.  Aromire Avenue 
 
37.  Ijaola Street 
 
38.  Iyaoloye Crescent 
 
39.  Olu Akerele Street 
 
40.  Emmanuel Street 
 
41.  Odo-Iyalaro Underbridge 
 
42.  Olatunbosun Street 
 
 
 
Ikorodu Local Government Area 
 
1. Ikorodu Road (from Mile 12 to Ikorodu Benson Roundabout) 
 
2.  Ipakodo-Ibeshe Road 
 
3.  Lagos-Ikorodu Express Road 
 
4.  T.O.S. Benson Road 
 
5.  Oba Sekumade Road 
 
6.  Lagos-Shagamu Road 
 
7.  Obafemi Awolowo Road 
 
8.  Ikorodu-Itoikin Road 
 
9.  Igbogbo Road 
 
10.  Ayangburen Road 
 
11.  Alhaji Street 
 
Ikoyi/ Obalende Local Council Development Area 
 
1.  Alfred Rewane Road 
 
2.  Glover Road 
 
3.  Alexander Road 
 
4.  Awolowo Road 
 
5.  Bourdillon Road 
 
6.  Gerald Road 
 
7.  Osborne Road Estate 1 & 2 
 
8.  Lugard Avenue 
 
9.  Olu Holloway Road 

 
10.  Bayo Kuku Street 
 
11.  Oba Adeyinka Oyekan Avenue 
 
12.  Mobolaji Johnson Road 
 
13.  Club Road 
 
14.  Federal Secretariat Road 
 
15.  Thompson Avenue 
 
16.  Lateef Jakande Avenue 
 
17.  Moore Road 
 
18.  Oyinkan Abayomi Road 
 
19.  Maroko Close 
 
20.  Adeyemi Lawson Street 
 
21.  Femi Okunnu Road 
 
22.  Jabita Close 
 
23.  Onikoyi/Turnbull Road 
 
24.  Iru Close 
 
25.  Ajayi Bembe Street 
 
26.  Entire Park View Estate Roads 
 
27.  Awori Road 
 
28.  The Entire Network of Roads in Ijeh, Dolphin Estates Highrise and Duplex 
 
29.  Lawrence Road 
 
30.  Reeve Road 
 
31.  St. Gregory Road 
 
32.  Ribadu Road 
 
33.  Raymond Njoku Street 
 
34.  Okotie Eboh Street 
 
35.  Keffi Street 
 
36.  Norman Williams Street 
 
37.  Ilabere Avenue 
 
38.  Oloto Road 
 
39.  Ojora Road 
 
40.  McPherson Avenue 
 
41.  Olanijonyin Avenue 
 
42.  Owena Street 
 
43.  Agodogba Road 

 
44.  Mobolaji Johnson Road 
 
45.  Bedwell Road 
 
46.  Murtala Muhammed Road 
 
47.  Obalende Road 
 
48.  Toyan Street 
 
49.  Odo Street 
 
50.  Awolowo Road 
 
51.  Bankole Oki Road 
 
52.  Ademola Street 
 
53.  Turnbull Road 
 
54.  Cameroon Road 
 
55.  Yemi Cardoso 
 
56.  Banana Estate 
 
57.  Dolphin Estate Duplex 
 
58.  Dolphin Estate Highrise 
 
59.  Alhaji Kannike Street 
 
60.  Igbo Street 
 
61.  Moshalashi Street 
 
62.  Eleshin Road 
 
63.  Ajeniya Street 
 
64.  Dr Bode Olajumoke Street 
 
65.  Alhaji Bashorun Close 
 
66.  Alhaji Alade Odunewu Street 
 
67.  Aromire close 
 
68.  Barrow Avenue 
 
69.  Olofin Street 
 
70.  Lalupon Street 
 
Lagos Island Local Government Area 
 
1.  The Entire Network of Roads and Bridges in Lagos Island Local Government Area and Lagos Island East Local 
Council Development Area 
 
 
Lagos Mainland Local Government Area 
1.  Herbert Macaulay Way 
 
2.  Barikisu Iyede Street 
 
3.  Murtala Muhammed Way 
 

4.  Third Mainland Bridge 
 
5.  Ijora Causeway 
 
6.  Commercial Avenue 
 
7.  Old Yaba Road 
 
8.  Sabo Round About 
 
9.  University Road 
 
10.  Abule-Ijesha Road 
 
11.  Harvey Road 
 
12.  Montgomery Road 
 
13.  Onike Iwaya Road 
 
14.  Morocco Road 
 
15.  Aje Street 
 
16.  Musiliu Smith Road 
 
17.  Hughes Avenue 
 
18.  Birrel Avenue 
 
19.  Hussey Road 
 
20.  Oweh Street 
 
21.  Aggrey Road 
 
22.  Borno Way 
 
23.  Apapa Road 
 
24.  Jibowu Street 
 
25.  Iwaya Road 
 
26.  Okobaba Street 
 
27.  Cemetery Street 
 
28.  Freeman Street 
 
 
Kosofe Local Government Area 
 
1.  Ogudu Alapere Expressway (from Toll Gate to Third Mainland Bridge) 
 
2.  Ogudu Road 
 
3.  Demurin Street 
 
4. Alapere Road 
 
5.  CMD Road 
 
6.  Doyin Omololu Street 
 
7.  Davies Street 
 
8.  50 Metres from Ikorodu Road on Ikosi Road 

 
9.  Omololu Street 
 
10.  Diya Street 
 
11.  Williams Street 
 
 
Mushin Local Government Area/Odi-Olowo Council Development Area 
 
1.  Agege Motor Road 
 
2.  Fatai Atere Way 
 
3.  Idi-Araba Street 
 
4.  Ilupeju By-Pass 
 
5.  Itire Road 
 
6.  Palm Avenue 
 
7.  Ladipo Street 
 
8.  Layi Oyekanmi Street 
 
9.  Olateju Street 
 
10.  Isolo Road 
 
11.  Ojekunle Road 
 
12.  Ilasamaja Road 
 
13.  Ogunmokun Street 
 
14.  Association Avenue 
 
15.  Kayode Street 
 
16.  Town Planning Way 
 
17.  Coker Road 
 
18.  Post Office Road 
 
19.  Mushin Road 
 
 
Ojo Local Government Area 
 
1.  Igbo Elerin Road 
 
2.  Lagos-Badagry Expressway 
 
3.  Iyana School Bus stop to Ishasi Road 
 
4.  Oba Ayoka to Iba New Site 
 
5.  Alaba International Market Road 
 
6.  Olojo Drive 
 
7.  Ojo Igbede Road 
 
8.  Nepa Road 
 
9.  Ishasi Road 

 
10.  Abule Aka Road to Ajangbadi Road 
 
11.  Akoberu / Sabo Road 
 
12.  Itire – Ilogbo Road 
 
13.  Iyana Era-Ilogbo Road 
 
14.  Ajangbadi-Shibiri Road 
 
15.  Kemberi /Aka Road 
 
 
Oshodi/Isolo Local Government Area 
 
1.  Okota Road 
 
2.  NNPC Road 
 
3.  Oshodi-Apapa Expressway 
 
4.  Airport Road 
 
5.  Egbe Road 
 
6.  Ago-Palace Way 
 
7.  Isolo Road 
 
8.  Osolo Way 
 
9.  Abimbola Street 
 
10.  Ejigbo-Ajao Estate Link Road 
 
11.  Estate Isheri-Oshun Road 
 
12.  Post Office Road 
 
13.  Oyetayo Street 
 
14.  Oshodi Road 
 
15.  Church Street 
 
16.  Afariogun Street 
 
17.  Sehinde Callisto Street 
 
18.  Mafoluku Road 
 
19.  Adeyemi Street 
 
20.  Ajibulu Street 
 
21. New Airport Road 
 
 
Somolu Local Government Area 
 
1.  Ikorodu Expressway (from Mile 12 to Yaba Terminus) 
 
2.  George Street 
 
3.  Morocco Road 
 
4.  Market Street 

 
5.  Bajulaiye Road 
 
6.  Fola Agoro Street 
 
7.  Apata Street 
 
8.  Oguntolu Street 
 
9.  Pedro Road 
 
10.  Igi Olugbin Street 
 
11.  Ashogbon Street 
 
12.  Gbagada Road 
 
13.  St. Finbarrs Road 
 
14.  Jibowu Street 
 
15.  Oweh Street 
 
16.  Isaac John Street 
 
17.  Watch-tower Avenue 
 
18.  Shylon Street 
 
19.  Shipeolu Street 
 
Surulere Local Government Area 
 
1.  Funsho Williams Avenue 
 
2.  Adeniran Ogunsanya Street 
 
3.  Ogunlana Drive 
 
4.  Bode Thomas Street 
 
5.  Akerele Road 
 
6.  Itire-Ojuelegba Road 
 
7.  Tejuosho Street 
 
8.  Alhaji Masha Road 
 
9.  Itire-Ijesha Road 
 
10.  Ishaga Road 
 
11.  Eric Moore Road 
 
12.  Randle Avenue 
 
13.  Agbebi Street 
 
14.  Babs Animashaun Road 
 
15.  Ijesha Road 
 
16.  Enitan Street 
 
17.  Adeshina Street 
 
18.  Adelabu Street 

 
19.  Adetola Street 
 
20.  Nuru Oniwo Street 
 
21.  Adekunle Kuye Street 
 
22.  Shaki Crescent 
 
23.  Oshogbo Street 
 
24.  Tokosi Street 
 
25.  Okota link Bridge 
 
26.  Opere Street 
 
27.  Odichie Street 
 
28.  Olatunde Onimole Street 
 
29.  Brown Street 
 
30.  Agboyin Street 
 
31.  Agbonyin Avenue 
 
32.  Nnobi Street 
 
33.  Sanya Street 
 
34.  Opeloyeru Street 
 
35.  Kilo Street 
 
36.  Adetioye Street 
 
37.  Fasoro Street 
 
38.  Oladimeji Street 
 
39.  Ojuolape Street 
 
40.  Solabomi Street 
 
41.  Ogungbesan Street 
 
 
Iru/ Victoria Island Local Council Development Area 
 
1.  Ahmadu Bello Way 
 
2.  Adeola Odeku Street 
 
3. Kofo Abayomi Street 
 
4.  Ozumba Mbadiwe Avenue 
 
5.  Ajose Adeogun Road 
 
6.  Idowu Taylor Street 
 
7. Idowu Martins Street 
 
8. Adeleke Adedoyin Street 
 
9.  Elsie Femi Pearse Street 
 

10.  Musa Yar Adua Street 
 
11.  Walter Carrington Crescent 
 
12.  Bishop Oluwole Street 
 
13.  Samuel Manuwa Street 
 
14.  Akin Olugbade Street 
 
15.  Molade Okoya Thomas Street 
 
16.  Sinari Daranijo Street 
 
17.  Bishop Aboyade Cole Street 
 
18.  Ligali Ayorinde Avenue 
 
19.  Saka Tinubu Street 
 
20. Karimu Kotun Street 
 
21.  Muri Okunola Street 
 
22.  Etim Inyang Crescent 
 
23.  Adetokunbo Ademola Street 
 
24.  Adeola Hopewell Street 
 
25.  Ahmed Onibudo Road 
 
26.  Engineering Close 
 
27.  Sanusi Fafunwa Street 
 
28.  Tiamiyu Savage Street 
 
29.  Olosa Street 
 
30. Oyin Jolayemi Street 
 
31.  Marinho Drive 
 
32.  Moshood Olugbani 
 
33.  Fatai Durosinmi Street 
 
34.  Adeyemo Alakija Street 
 
35.  Oko Awo Close 
 
36.  Afribank Street 
 
37.  Jide Oki Street 
 
38.  Festival Road 
 
39.  Federal Housing Complex Road 
 
40.  Oba Idowu Oniru Road 
 
41.  Palace Road 
 
42.  Oniru New Market Road 
 
43.  Water Corporation Road 
 

44.  Akin Adesola Street 
 
  

Schedule III 
Vehicle Inspection Offences and Penalties 
 
No Violation  Penalty   
  Point Fine Additional  
      
1. Driving without valid 
driver’s License 
2  Impound Vehicle Payment for Removal 
and Storage and 
evidence of payment for 
the licence 
2. Driving of any vehicle by 
person under 18 years 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Impound Vehicle Payment for Removal 
and Storage 
3. Learner Driver Without 
Permit 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Impound Vehicle Payment for Removal 
and Storage and 
evidence of payment for 
the permit 
4. Learner drive on highways 2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Dislodge driver  
5. Learner drive and 
unaccompanied by licenced 
driver 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Dislodge driver  
6. Driving an unlicenced 
vehicle 
4 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Imprisonment of 
3 years 
Or both fine and 
imprisonment 
7. Driving with a fake number 
plate 
4 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
 Or both fine and 
imprisonment 
8. Driving a vehicle with 
unauthorised or defective 
number plate 
 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
 Or both fine and 
imprisonment 
9. Driving with a forged 
driver’s licence 
 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
 Or both fine and 
imprisonment 
10. Driving without a valid 
MOT test certificate 
2  Impound Vehicle Payment for Removal 
and Storage and 
evidence of payment for 
the certificate 
11. Driving without a valid 
roadworthiness certificate 
2  Impound Vehicle Payment for Removal 
and Storage and 
evidence of payment for 
the certificate 
12. Driving without a valid 
vehicle licence 
  Impound Vehicle Payment for Removal 
and Storage and 
evidence of payment for 
the licence 
13. Not painting a 
commercial vehicle in 
approved colours 
 
4 N50,000.00 Enforce Painting  
      
15. Driving a commercial 
vehicle without valid 
hackney/stage carriage 
 
2  Impound Vehicle Payment for Removal 
and Storage and 
evidence of payment for 
the certificate 
16. Driving a commercial 
vehicle without certificate 
of road worthiness 
 
2  Impound Vehicle Payment for Removal 
and Storage and 
evidence of payment for 
the certificate 
17. Non- display of hackney 
permit 
 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Impound Vehicle  
18. No car hire service permit  
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Impound Vehicle  
19. Disobeying traffic control 2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. Impound Vehicle  

personnel 
 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
20. Neglect of traffic 
directions 
2  Forfeiture of the 
vehicle to the 
State 
3 months imprisonment/ 
community 
service 
21. Smoking while driving  
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Impound Vehicle  
22. Riding motorcycle 
without approved crash 
helmet for rider and 
passenger 
 
1 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
 Or both fine and 
imprisonment 
23. Driving motorcycle 
without rider’s permit 
 
  Impound 
motorcycle 
Payment for removal 
and storage and evidence 
of payment for the 
permit 
24. Operating vehicle within 
restricted routes or 
beyond approved hour 
 
3 N50,000.00 Impound Vehicle 6 months imprisonment 
or both fine and 
imprisonment 
25. Physical assault on traffic 
officer 
 
 N50,000.00 6 months 
imprisonment 
 
26. Commuter or conductor 
hanging on tailboard of 
moving vehicle 
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Dislodge  
27. Driving vehicles with 
doors left open 
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Dislodge  
28. Driving a right hand 
vehicle 
 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Conversion  
29. Driving motorcycle/three 
wheelers with non-
functional lamps 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Effect Repairs  
30. Driving private motor 
vehicle with non-functional 
lamps 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
Effect Repairs  
31. Driving commercial 
vehicle with non-functional 
lamps 
2 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
  
32. Driving Trailers, tankers 
and tippers with non-
functional lamps 
4 N50,000.00 Impound vehicle  
33. Driving company motor 
vehicles with non-functional 
lamps 
3 N25,000.00 Effect repairs  
34. Driving company motor 
vehicles with non-functional 
lamps 
3 N25,000.00 Impound Vehicle  
35. Driving with worn-out tyres 1 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
  
36. Driving without spare tyre 1 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
  
37. Excessive smoke emission 1 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
  
38. Fire extinguisher violation 1 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
  
39. Windscreen violation 1 1
st
 offender - N20,000.00. 
Subsequent offender - 
N30,000.00 
  

40. Storage charge for 
impounded cars, jeep and 
mini-buses per day 
 N1,000.00   
41. Storage charge for 
impounded motorcycles and 
3wheelers per day 
 N500.00   
42. Storage charge for all other 
impounded vehicles (6 
wheelers and above) per day 
 N2,000.00   
43. Towing an impounded 
car, jeep and mini buses 
 N10,000.00   
44. Towing other commercial 
vehicles excluding trailers 
(mini-buses)  
 N10,000.00   
45. Towing a Trailer or Tanker 
(empty)  
 N50,000.00   
46. Towing a trailer or tanker 
(loaded) 
 N100,000.00   
47. Towing tippers and lorries 
(loaded) 
 N50,000.00   
48. Towing luxurious buses  N50,000.00   
49. Towing an overnight 
breakdown trailer 
 N100,000.00   
50. Towing tricycles  N2,000.00   
51. Towing Motorcycles  N500.00   
52. Hire of Heavy duty recovery 
equipment (Towing 
/Recovery fees) 
  At Hirer’s Cost  
53. Failure to pay Penalty fee 
within prescribed time 
   Double the initial 
penalty 
 
In  addition  to  the  penalty  prescribed  above,  the  Authority  may  direct  the  driver/rider  to  attend  the  Lagos  State Drivers’ 
Institute for training and reorientation. 
 
  

Schedule IV 
Road Traffic Regulations 
 
[Section 38] 
 
1.  These regulations may be cited as the Road Traffic Regulations. 
 
2.  In these regulations unless the context otherwise requires- 
 
“Authorised Officer” includes officer of the Authority, the Service or the Ministry; 
 
“Authority” means the Lagos State Traffic Management Authority established under section 1 of the 
Lagos State Traffic Management Authority Law; 
 
“Commissioner” means Commissioner for Transportation or any member of the State Executive Council 
being in charge of transportation in Lagos State; 
 
“Heavy Motor Vehicle” means a commercial vehicle of which the gross weight exceeds one ton fifteen hundred-
weight; 
 
“Law” means the Road Traffic Law 
 
“Ministry” means Ministry of Transportation; 
 
“Motor-Cycle” means a motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than two  wheels, and includes a 
combination of a motor-cycle and side-car; 
 
“Net Weight” means the weight of a vehicle unladen with a full fuel tank, full radiator and inclusive of 
all equipment; 
 
“Overall Length” means the overall length of a vehicle exclusive of the starting handle (if any); 
 
“Overall Width” means  the   width   measured  between  parallel  planes passing  through  the  extreme 
projecting points of a vehicle exclusive of any driving mirror; 
 
“Overhang” means  the  distance  measured  horizontally  and  parallel  to  the longitudinal  axis  of  a 
vehicle between two vertical planes at right angles to such axis the one passing through 
that point of the vehicle which projects furthest to the rear and the other passing- 
 
(a) in the case of a motor vehicle having two axles, one of which is not a steering axle, through the centre point 
of that axle; and 
 
(b) in the case of a motor vehicle having three axles; 
 
(i)  where  the  front  axle  is  the  only  steering  axle, through  a  point  four  inches  in  rear  of  the  centre  of  a 
straight line joining the centre points of the rear and middle axles; and 
 
(ii)  where the rear axle is the only steering axle, through the centre point of the middle axle; and 
 
(iii)  where  all  the  axles  but  one  are  steering  axles, through  the  centre  point  of  the  axle  which  is  not  a 
steering axle; and 
 
(c)  in the case of a motor vehicle (whether having two axles or three axles) where all the axles are steering axles 
and in the case of a motor vehicle having four or more axles, through a point situated on the longitudinal axis 
of the vehicle and such that a line drawn from it at right angles to that axis will pass through the centre of the 
minimum turning circle of the vehicle; 
 
“professional driver” includes paid driver; 
 
“Service” means Vehicle Inspection Service established under section 13of the Law; 
 
“Vehicle” means carriages, wagons, carts, motor vehicles, motorcycles, tricycles, vans, lorries, 
trailers, hand carts, sledges, trucks, barrows, and all other machines for the carriage 
of goods or persons. 
 
“Width” in relation to a tyre  means the maximum thickness of the tyre, from one  side of the 
tyre  to  the  other  measuring  parallel  to  the  axle  as specified  on  the  tyre  by  the 
manufacturer. 

 
3.        (1)  No person shall cause or permit a motor vehicle or trailer to be used on any highway, or shall drive or have 
charge  of  a  motor  vehicle  or trailer,  when  so  used,  unless  the  conditions  hereinafter  set  forth  are satisfied, 
namely- 
 
(a)  a  motor  vehicle,  if  its  net  weight  exceeds  five hundred weight,  must  be  capable  of  being  so  worked 
that it may travel either forwards or backwards; 
 
(b)  no motor vehicle or trailer shall exceed eight feet in overall width; 
 
(c)  no  load  on  any  motor  vehicle  or  trailer  shall  project  beyond either  side  of  such  vehicle  to  a  greater 
extent than three inches; 
 
(d)  the  overhang  of  any  motor  vehicle  or  trailer  shall  not exceed  seven  twenty-fourths  of  the  overall 
length: 
 
(e)  no load may protrude more than three feet beyond the front elevation of a motor vehicle or trailer and 
where the load projects more than six feet behind the rear elevation of such vehicle, a red flag shall be 
fixed by day to the extreme end of the load and a red lamp by night in a similar position, the flag or 
lamp being clearly visible from the rear; 
 
(f)  the height from the ground level of any motor vehicle or trailer with any freight or load placed thereon 
shall not at any point exceed eleven feet: 
 
Provided that where the freight or load is entirely composed of seed cotton or cotton lint the height of 
the  highest  point  of  such freight  or  load  from  the  ground  level  may  be  increased  to  twelve feet  six 
inches; 
 
(g)        (i)  any freight or load on a motor vehicle or trailer shall be secured in such manner as to render it 
impossible  for such  freight  or  load  or  any  part  thereof  to  fall  or  be  jolted off  the  motor  vehicle  or 
trailer  when  in  motion  or  to  come into  contact  with  the  road  while  the  motor  vehicle  or  trailer is  in 
motion; 
 
(ii)  no freight,  load or other article  whatsoever shall be carried on the top or outside  of the  hood, 
canopy or roofing of any motor vehicle other than spare wheels or spare tyres for such vehicle 
unless authorized by the Authority; 
  
(iii)  freight  or  load  of  a  greater  weight  than  that  which  the vehicle  is  constructed  to  carry,  as 
registered  and  stated  on  the licence,  shall  not  be  placed  on  any  commercial  vehicle  or  trailer 
and the owner shall cause the net weight of the vehicle, the weight of such freight or load and, 
where required by the licensing authority, the axle weights to be painted on some conspicuous 
part of the off side of the vehicle in letters and figures not less than one inch in height, and of 
such shape and colour as to be legible and clearly distinguishable from the colour of the ground 
where on the letters and figures are painted or marked and he shall cause the paint or marking 
to  be  from  time  to  time  repaired  or  renewed  as often  as  may  be  necessary  to  keep  the  said 
letters and figures  legible and clearly distinguishable; 
 
(iv)  no person shall be carried within or upon a trailer other than a guard or a brakes man or both; 
and  no  person  shall  be carried within  or  upon  a  commercial  vehicle  not  being  a stage  or 
hackney carriage,  or  hearse  or  commercial vehicle  used  as  a  hearse,  other than  the  owner  or 
hirer of the vehicle or the owner of the goods carried on the vehicle or trailer, or the servants or 
agents of the owner or hirer: 
 
Provided that in the case of a vehicle without sides fitted to the body or the sides of which are 
less than one foot in height no person, other than a guard or a brakesman, shall be carried. 
 
(v) no person shall stand in or on a vehicle or trailer which isnot covered in while such vehicle or 
trailer is in motion; 
 
(h)  every  motor  vehicle  and  every  trailer  shall  be  fitted  with pneumatic  tyres,  on  all  its  wheels,  and  no  motor 
vehicle  or  trailer shall  be  driven  on  any  highway  if  its  tyres  are  not,  in  the  opinion  of the  Authority  or the 
Service, in all respects in such a condition as not to cause, or to be likely to cause, danger to any person on 
the vehicle or to any person on the vehicle or to any person using the highway at the time, or to any property 
on or adjoining the highway; 
 
(i)       (i)  every motor vehicle shall be equipped with two  entirely independent and efficient braking systems, or 
with one  efficient  braking  system  having  two  independent means  of  operation,  in  each  case  so 
designed, constructed and maintained that the failure of any single portion of any braking system shall 

not  even  under  the  most  adverse conditions  prevent  the  brakes  on  two  wheels  or,  in  the  case of  a 
vehicle  having  less  than  four  wheels,  on  one  wheel, from  operating  effectively,  so  as  either  to  hold 
such wheels from revolving or to have the same effect in stopping the motor vehicle as if such wheels 
were so held: 
 
Provided that in the case of a single braking system the two means of operation shall not be deemed to 
be  otherwise than  independent  solely  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  they  are connected  either  directly  or 
indirectly with the same cross shaft; 
 
(ii)  in  the  case  of  a  motor  vehicle  having  more  than three  wheels  and  equipped  with  two  independent 
braking systems  each  such  system  shall  be  so  constructed,  designed and  maintained  that  if  it  acts 
either directly or indirectly) on two wheels only it shall act on two wheels on the same axle; 
 
(iii)  where  in  the  case  of  a  single  braking  system  the means  of  operation  are  connected  either  directly  or 
indirectly  with  the  same  cross  shaft,  the  brakes  applied  by one  of  such  means  shall  act  on  all  the 
wheels of the motor vehicle directly and not through the transmission gear; 
 
(iv)  in all cases the brakes operated by one of the means of operation shall be applied by direct mechanical 
action without the intervention of any hydraulic, electric or pneumatic device; 
 
(v)  in  all  cases  the  brakes  operated  by  one  of  the  means of  operation  shall  act  directly  upon  the  wheels 
and not through the transmission gear; 
 
(vi)  except in the case of a motor bicycle, with or without a side-car attached, the braking system or one of 
the  braking  systems  shall  be  so  designed,  constructed  and maintained  that  it  can  be  set  so  as 
effectually to prevent two at least, or in the case of a motor vehicle  having only three wheels, one of 
the wheels, from revolving when the vehicle is left unattended; 
 
(j)  all engines shall be efficiently silenced; no cut-outs or open exhausts shall be used; 
 
(k)  all motor vehicles and trailers shall carry at all times functioning electric lights and no other light of any other 
colour other than those which are laid down in these regulations shall be exhibited on any vehicle without the 
express permission in writing of the principal licensing authority; 
 
 
(l)       (a)   all motor vehicles and trailers shall carry functioning electric lamps as follows- 
 
(i) two head lamps in front, one on each side of the vehicle so constructed and placed as to exhibit 
white  light  visible  within  a  reasonable  distance  in the  direction  towards  which  the  vehicle  is 
facing and  clearly  to  indicate  the  width  of  the  vehicle,  and all  such  vehicles  shall  carry  a 
direction indicator on each side of the front of the vehicle; 
 
(ii)  two  functioning  lamp  fittings  at  the  rear  of the  vehicle,  one  on  each  side  of  the  vehicle  so 
constructed  and  placed  as  to  exhibit  red,  amber  and white  light  separately  as  running 
simultaneously visible  with  the  head  lamps,  brake,  direction  and reverse  direction  to  that  in 
which the  vehicle  is facing and such that other road users  approaching the  rear of the vehicle 
shall  have  sufficient  notice  of its  distance,  direction  and  whether  it  is  stationary  or not;  and 
such  fittings  shall  be  so  contrived  as  to illuminate  and  render  easily  distinguishable  the 
identification plate on the vehicle unless a separate lamp is carried for this purpose; 
 
(b)  all motor cycles and tricycles shall carry a single functioning head lamp in front, along with direction 
indicators  on  either  side  and  visible  within  a  reasonable distance  in  the  direction  towards  which  the 
motor  cycle  is facing,  and  one  functioning  lamp  fitting  at  the  rear  so constructed  and  placed  as  to 
exhibit red lights separately as running light and brake light visible within a reasonable distance in the 
reverse direction to that which vehicle is facing; 
 
(c)  when a trailer is attached to a motor vehicle sub paragraphs (i) and (ii) shall apply to both the trailer 
and the motor vehicle. 
 
(m)  every  motor  vehicle  shall  be  fitted  with  an  efficient  electric horn  sounding not  more  than  a  single  note,  or 
with a bulb horn which gives out a single note when the bulb is pressed but which does not make any sound 
when the bulb is released. The use by motor vehicles of any form of warning appliance other than of a type 
approved by the Authority or the Service is forbidden; 
 
(n)  every vehicle shall carry a driving mirror which shall be so fixed on the vehicle as to enable the driver thereof 
when driving to have a clear view reflected in the mirror of any following traffic; 
 

(o)  every  motor  vehicle  or  trailer  when  moving  on  any highway  shall  have  its  wheels  properly  aligned  to  the 
chassis  so that  the  true  rolling  motion  of  the  wheels  or  trailer  shall  be conveyed  to  the  road,  and  no  motor 
vehicle or trailer with a defective wheel, wheel hub, or axle-tree, shall be used on any highway; 
 
(p)  every motor vehicle  shall be provided with a strong and reliable steering gear which shall be kept in such a 
state  of  repair and  adjustment  as  to  allow  the  vehicle  to  be  turned  readily  and with  certainty.  The  steering 
apparatus and driving gear of a motor vehicle shall be so arranged that the driver can manipulate the controls 
with certainty and at the same time have a clear view of the road; 
 
(q)  every motor vehicle (other than a  motor-cycle) and every trailer shall be equipped with suitable, free acting 
and efficient springs, and these springs shall be kept at all times in proper alignment and properly secured to 
the axle and to the frame of the vehicles so that no undue lateral movement is allowed; 
 
(r)  all glass fitted to motor vehicles shall be  maintained in such condition that it does not obscure the vision of 
the driver while the vehicle is being driven on the highway; 
 
(s)  every  motor  vehicle  or  trailer  shall  be  provided  with  wings or  similar  means  to  catch  as  far  as  practicable 
mud or water thrown up by the rotation of the wheels, unless adequate protection is afforded by the body of 
the vehicle; 
 
(t)  every  motor  vehicle  and  trailer  and  all  parts  and  accessories of  such  vehicle  or  trailer shall  be  in  such  a 
condition  as  not  to cause  or  be  likely  to  cause  danger  to  any  person  therein  or  to  any person  using  the 
highway or to any property lying on or adjoining the highway. 
 
(2)       (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraphs (c), (e) and (f) of paragraph (1) the Ministry may grant 
in writing for a particular occasion or particular occasions a permit for the carriage by a motor vehicle or 
trailer of any specified freight or load which by reason of the nature of the freight or load is incapable of 
being so placed on the vehicle as to conform to these provisions. 
 
(b)  Such permit shall be carried by the driver of the motor vehicle on such occasion or occasions and shall be 
produced by him on demand being made by any licensing authority or authorized officer. 
 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph (1), the Ministry may grant in writing for a 
particular occasion or occasions a permit for the use of a motor vehicle or trailer which does not conform to 
requirements of the said paragraph and such permit shall be subject to any conditions endorsed thereon. Such 
permit  shall  be  carried by  the  driver  of  the  motor  vehicle  on  such  occasion  or  occasions  and  shall be 
produced by him on demand being made by authorized officer. 
 
4. A trailer shall not be used on any highway unless the following special conditions are observed- 
 
(a)  the couplings provided for attaching the trailer to a motor vehicle shall be efficient for the purpose; 
 
(b)  every  three  or  four-wheeled  trailer  exceeding  five  hundred weight net  weight  or  two-wheeled  trailer 
exceeding ten hundred weight net weight shall have a brake in good working order which when applied shall 
cause  two  of  the  wheels  of  the trailer  on  the  same  axle  to  be  so  held  that  the  wheels  shall  be effectually 
prevented from revolving, or shall have the same effecting stopping the trailer as if such wheels were so held, 
and, subject to the provisions of paragraph (c) of this regulation, shall carry a person who shall be competent 
and shall be seated in a convenient position to apply the brakes of the trailer efficiently; 
 
(c)  if  the  brakes  upon  the  motor  vehicle  are  so  constructed  that none  can  be  used  without  bringing  into  action 
simultaneously  the brake  attached  to  the  trailer,  or  if the  brake  of  the  trailer  can  be applied  from  the  motor 
vehicle by a person upon the motor vehicle independently of the brakes of the latter, it shall not be necessary 
to carry a brakesman on the trailer; 
 
(d)  if  more  than  one  trailer  is  drawn  by  a  motor vehicle  the provisions  of  paragraphs  (a),  (b)  and  (c)  of  this 
regulation shall apply to the trailer next to the motor vehicle and in respect of all other trailers the following 
provisions shall apply- 
 
(i)  the  coupling  provided  for  attaching  the  trailer  to  the trailer  in  front  of  it  shall  be  efficient  for  the 
purpose; 
 
(ii)  the trailer shall have a brake in good working order which when applied shall cause two of the wheels 
of  the trailer  on  the  same  axle  to  be  so  held  that  the  wheels  shall be  effectually prevented  from 
revolving or shall have the same effect in stopping the trailer as if such wheels were so held; 
 
(iii)  there shall be carried on each trailer a person competent to apply the brake efficiently; and 
 

(iv)  the braking system of each trailer shall be entirely independent of the motor vehicle drawing the trailer 
and of any other trailer; 
 
(e)       (i) the  gross  weight  of  a  two  or  three-wheeled  trailer shall  not  exceed  four  tons  and  if  a  four-wheeled 
trailer eight tons; 
 
(ii)  not more than four tons shall be carried on any one axle of a trailer: 
 
Provided  that  the  Ministry  may  by  consent  in  writing,  and  subject to  any  conditions  that  may  be  impose, 
exempt a particular trailer from these provisions; 
 
(f)  the wheel base of any trailer having an axle weight of four tons or over shall not be less than ten feet between 
axle centres; 
 
(g)  not more than one person other than the brakesman may be carried or be permitted to be carried in a trailer. 
 
5.  Every heavy motor vehicle in use on any highway shall be fitted with electric lamps specified in sub-regulations  
  3 (1) (a) (i) and (ii) 
 
6.  Direction indicators intended to intimate a right-hand turn shall be fitted only on the right or near side and direction 
indicators intended to intimate a left-hand turn shall be fitted only on the left or off side of the vehicleand, except as 
hereinafter provided in regulation 7 hereof, every direction indicator shall be so designed and fitted that- 
 
(a) it is not more than five feet behind the base of the windscreen; and 
 
(b)  it is not more than seven feet above the level of the ground; and 
 
(c)  when in operation- 
 
(i)  it  temporarily  alters  the  outline  of  the  vehicle  to  the extent  of  at  least  eight  inches  measured 
horizontally; and 
 
(ii)  the outermost point of the indicator shall be at least eight inches further from the longitudinal axis of 
the vehicle than is the outermost point of the driver’s cab or of the  side  of  the  body  immediately 
behind the driver’s seat whichever is the wider; and 
 
(iii)  it remains steady when extended; and 
 
(d)  the driver of the vehicle when in his driving seat may be readily aware that it is operating correctly. 
 
7.  (1)  Additional  direction  indicators  in  the  form  specified  in  regulation  6may  be  fitted at  the  rear  of  any  vehicle 
when- 
 
(a)  they are only used in addition to those fitted in accordance with the provision of Regulation 6 hereof; 
and 
 
(b)  they are visible at a reasonable distance from any point in the rear of the vehicle. 
 
(2)  Every driver in charge of a disabled motor vehicle on any highway shall in addition to the duties imposed by 
Regulation 15 (1) (i) ensure that the period the vehicle is so disabled he shall cause his hazard lamps to be lit 
so as to warn approaching road users. 
 
8.  Every  direction  indicator  shall  be  also  fitted  that  when  not  in  operation  it must  not  mislead  will  not  be  likely  to 
mislead the driver of any other vehicle or any other person controlling traffic. 
 
9.  Every light shown by a direction indicator shall be diffused by means of frosted glass or other adequate means. 
 
10.  (1)  Every  commercial  vehicle  and  every  trailer  shall  before  being registered  or  licensed  and  every  six  months 
thereafter be examined by an  examiner appointed by the Service. 
 
(2)  Where at such examination a  vehicle is found to be roadworthy the examiner shall issue  a certificate to that 
effect  which  shall  remain  valid  for six  months.  Such  certificate  shall  be  carried  within  the  vehicle  and 
produced when required by the licensing authority, an administrative officer or an authorized officer. 
 
(3)  A  duplicate  certificate  may  be  issued  upon  application  to  the examiner  and  upon  the  prescribed  fee  being 
paid. 
 

(4)  Where  the  vehicle  has  been  examined  and  is  found  not  to  be roadworthy  in  any  respect  the  owner  of  the 
vehicle shall be served with a notice by the examiner setting out the defects to be remedied and shall not after 
a  receipt  of  such  notice  permit  the  vehicle  to  be  used  or  submit  the vehicle  for  licensing  to  any  licensing 
authority until such time as the defects have been remedied to the satisfaction of the examiner. 
 
(5)  There shall be payable by the owner for every such examination the prescribed fee. 
 
 
11.  (1)  Every  private  motor  vehicle  5  years  old  (from  date  of  manufacture) plying  any  road  in  the  State  shall  be 
examined annually to determine its roadworthiness and functioning of its working parts; 
 
(2)  The  examination  referred  to  in  sub-regulation  (i)  of  this  Regulation shall  be  known  as  Ministry  of 
Transportation Test (MOT); 
 
(3)  There  shall  be  payable  by  the owner  of  the  vehicle  for  such examination  a  fee  to  be  prescribed  by  the 
Commissioner; 
 
(4)  Where  at  such  examination  a  vehicle  is  found  to  be  roadworthy, the  examiner  shall  issue  a  licence  which 
shall remain valid for one year; 
 
(5)  Such licence shall be carried within the vehicle and produced when required by an authorized officer; 
 
(6)  The  conditions  and  fee  payable  for  the  Ministry  of  Transportation Test  may  be  as  prescribed  by  the 
Commissioner; 
 
(7)  The examiner referred to in sub-regulation (iv) of this Regulation shall be appointed by the Commissioner. 
 
12.  No motor vehicle may be used on a highway if the axle weight of any of its axles exceeds four tons, or if the gross 
weight of the vehicle exceeds eight tons: 
 
Provided  that  the  Commissioner  may,  by  his  consent  in  writing,  and subject  to  such  conditions,  if  any,  as  he  may 
impose, exempt a motor vehicle or class of motor vehicles exceeding such weights from this regulation. 
 
13.  The Service or any authorized officer may at any time, for reasonable require any commercial vehicle or trailer to be 
driven  to  any reasonably  convenient  place  to  have  its  net  or  gross  weight  or  any  axle weight  ascertained  and  the 
person driving or in charge of such vehicle or trailer shall comply with any such requirement. 
 
14.  No person shall cause or permit to be used on any highway or shall on any highway drive or have charge of a motor 
vehicle or a trailer which is not in all respects in accordance with the provisions of these regulations, or which is so 
used or driven as to contravene the provisions of these regulations. 
 
 15. (1) Any person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle when used on relating to driving. any highway- 
 
(a)  (i) shall not drive in any place within a township at a speed exceeding forty kilometres an hour or any other 
prescribed speed limit whichever is lower; 
 
(ii) shall not if the vehicle is a commercial vehicle exceed the prescribed speed; 
 
(b)  shall not cause the vehicle to travel backwards further than may be necessary for turning or other reasonable 
purpose; 
 
(c)  shall  not  when  on  the  vehicle  be  in  such  a  position  that  he  cannot have  control  over  the  same,  or  that  he 
cannot obtain a full view of the road and traffic ahead of the vehicle; 
 
(d)  shall,  whenever necessary and provided it is not in contravention of any law or regulation, by sounding  his 
horn or other appliance, give audible and sufficient warning of the approach or position of the vehicle; but he 
shall  not  use  any  appliance  which  has  not  been  approved  by  the Ministry,  the  Authority  or  the  Service  or 
make any unnecessary noise with his horn or other appliance; 
 
(e)  shall, on the request of any authorized officer in uniform, or of any person having charge of a horse, mule or 
donkey  or  other  beast  of  draught or  burden  or  of  any  cattle,  sheep,  goats  or  pigs,  or  if  any  such  officer  or 
person  shall  put  up  his  hand  as  a  signal  for  that  purpose,  or  if  any  such officer  shall  blow  his  whistle  as  a 
signal for that purpose, cause the vehicle to stop and to remain stationary or to proceed at not more than four 
miles an hour if so desired so long as may be reasonably necessary; 
 
(f)  shall,  before  rounding  any  curve  or  corner,  or  entering  or  crossing a  road  or  approaching  a  fork,  reduce 
speed; and in rounding any curve or corner, shall keep as close as possible to the right-hand side of the road, 
and  when  rounding  a  curve  at  which  the  road  ahead  is  not  visible  for  agreater  distance  than  one  hundred 

yards or any corner, or entering or crossing a road or approaching a fork, shall not pass or attempt to pass any 
traffic  travelling  in  the  same  direction;  and  shall  not  other- wise  than  by reason  of  an  enforced  stoppage  or 
owing to the necessities of traffic, stop his vehicle within twenty-five feet from any corner; 
 
(g)  shall not be asleep while in charge of the vehicle on a highway; 
 
(h)  shall draw up his vehicle close to the side of the road, so as to allow a clear roadway for passing traffic and 
shall  obey  the  directions  of any  authorised  officer  in  uniform  as  to  where  he  is  to  place  his  vehicle while 
waiting on the road, and shall not leave such vehicle unattended on any highway with the engine running nor 
shall  he  quit  the  vehicle  without having  taken  due  precautions  against  its  being  started  in  his  absence,  or 
allow the vehicle to stand on such highway so as to cause any unnecessary obstruction thereof; 
 
(i)  shall  not  leave  the  vehicle  if  disabled  on  any  highway  the  right  side or  near-side  thereof,  and  in  such  case 
shall at a distance of 3 metres from both the  front and rear of the vehicle, one each a triangular shaped sign 
which  shall  be  60cm  on  each  side  of  the  said  sign,  which  said  sign  shall  be hollowed  and  painted  with 
reflective colour with the word ―C‖ boldly inscribed on the  said sign, and shall cause  such  vehicle  to bear 
lighted lamps at  the  front  and  rear  thereof  between  sunset  and  sunrise  as  specified in  subparagraph  (i)  of 
paragraph (i) of regulation 7; 
 
(j)  shall obey all directions,  whether verbal  or by signal, given by an authorized officer in uniform, to stop the 
vehicle, or to make it slow down, or to pass on any indicated side of the authorized officer, or to keep to any 
indicated line of traffic; 
 
(k)  shall  make  use  of  the  hand-signals  as  prescribed  and  shall  pay regard  to  such  signals  when  used  by  other 
persons: 
 
Provided that mechanical or electrically operated direction indicators when fitted to a vehicle may be used for 
indicating that he intends to turn to the right or left; 
 
(l)  shall comply with the signs illustrated in the Schedule to the Regulations, and to all traffic signs placed on or 
near any highway by order of the authority responsible for the maintenance of the highway for the guidance 
of drivers of vehicles; 
 
(m)  shall  obey  all  notices,  intended  to  apply  to  vehicles,  which  may  be erected  or  exhibited  on  or  near  any 
highway or so as to be visible from any highway by order of the authority responsible for the maintenance of 
the highway, prohibiting, restricting, or regulating traffic over bridges or sections of road; 
 
(n)  shall on approaching any authorised officer on duty at any road junction give the appropriate signal to him, 
and shall on no account make a turn or proceed to cross the road until such officer has signalled permission 
for him to do so; 
 
(o)  shall not permit any person to be on the vehicle in such a position as to interfere with the driver’s control of 
the  vehicle, or his full view of the road and traffic ahead or his ability to make  the prescribed hand signals, 
and shall not on a right-hand steering controlled vehicle, permit any person to sit or stand on the right-hand 
side of the driver, nor more than two persons on the left-hand side of the driver, and on a left-hand steering 
controlled vehicle shall not permit any person to sit or stand on the left-hand side of the driver, nor more than 
two persons on the right hand side of the driver; 
 
(p)  shall, on demand being made by an authorised officer in uniform produce his licence to drive such a vehicle 
for the inspection of such officer: 
 
Provided that if within twenty-four hours after the production of his licence  was demanded he produces the 
licence in person to such office as may have been specified by him at the time of its production was required, 
he shall not be convicted of an offence under this sub-paragraph; 
 
(q)  shall  not  permit  any  person  to  ride  on  the  wing,  running  boards, fenders  or  bonnet  or  sides  of  the  vehicle 
except for the purpose of testing the vehicle during repairs; 
 
(r)  shall  not  permit  in  the  case  of  a  commercial  vehicle,  any  person  to ride  on  the  steps,  tail-board,  canopy or 
roofing of the vehicle, nor on any load or freight on the vehicle or on any trailer drawn thereby, if any part of 
the person on such load or freight is at a greater height than eleven feet from the ground level; 
 
(s)  shall not permit any person other than the person in charge thereof to be carried in a motor vehicle which is 
being drawn by another motor vehicle; 
 
(t)  shall except in the case of a motor-cycle carry two triangular shaped signs described in sub-paragraph (i) of 
this paragraph; a  jack or other appliance sufficiently strong to lift the  vehicle  for the  purpose  of changing  a 
wheel and the necessary tool for effecting such a change. 

 
(2) (i) Every motor vehicle shall in approaching and passing traffic coming in the opposite direction be driven on 
the right or near side of the highway. 
 
(ii)  Every  motor vehicle  when overtaking traffic  proceeding in the  same direction shall pass such traffic on 
the left or off side thereof. 
 
(iii)  When  one  motor  vehicle  is  being  overtaken  by  another  the front  vehicle  shall  give  way  to  allow  the 
overtaking vehicle to pass. In all cases a motor vehicle shall be driven so as to give as much space as 
possible for the passing of other traffic. 
 
(iv)  When two or more motor vehicles approach each other on a highway the driver of each vehicle shall, 
where  by  reason  of  the width  and  condition  of  such  highway,  it  is  necessary  or  desirable so  to  do, 
cause  his vehicle  to slow down for the  purpose  of allowing safe  passage  to the  other vehicles or any 
other traffic on the highway. 
 
(v)  The driver of a commercial vehicle shall, whenever it is necessary or desirable by reason of the width 
or  condition  of  the highway  so  to  do,  stop  his  vehicle  in  order  to  allow  lighter  motor traffic 
approaching or overtaking him to pass. 
 
16.  Motorcycle capacity and use 
 
(1)  Subject to the provisions of section 4 of the Law, motorcycles below 200cc engine capacity shall not be used 
or operated on bridges and carriage road with two or more lanes in opposite directions. 
 
(2)  A motorcycle for mail distribution or courier services may be exempted from route restriction, provided that 
such a motorcycle shall:- 
 
(a)  have a minimum engine capacity of 200cc; 
 
(b)  carry prescribed vehicle number plate and or identification; 
 
(c)  be fitted with properly fixed mail cabin on the pillion; and 
 
(d)  not carry passenger. 
 
(3)  A  motorcycle  for  mail  distribution  or  courier  services  shall  not  be used  as  such  unless  an  exemption  from 
route restriction has been granted by the Ministry. 
 
(4)  No person shall drive or ride or be carried on a motorcycle, without wearing a protective helmet. 
 
(5)  In case of a passenger on a motorcycle the owner or the driver of such motorcycle shall provide a protective 
helmet for the use of the passenger. 
 
(6)  No person shall drive or ride or carry a passenger on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is comprehensively 
insured under the prescribed insurance policy. 
 
17.  The driver of a motorcycle shall not carry any person in front of him on the cycle, but if the cycle is fitted with a seat 
properly constructed for the purpose and firmly affixed to the frame, may carry not more than one person at the rear 
of the cycle. 
 
18.  Any person in a  motor vehicle  who shall in any way obstruct or molest the driver of such motor vehicle  whilst the 
same is in motion, shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
19.  (1)  Every  motor  vehicle  shall  be  so  constructed  as  to  enable  the driver,  when  the  vehicle  is  stationary,  to  stop  the 
action  of  any  machinery attached  to,  or  forming  part  of,  the  vehicle  so  far  as  may  be  necessary  for vehicle  the 
prevention of noise. The driver shall avoid unnecessary noise when the vehicle is stationary. 
 
(2)  Proper precautions shall be taken by the owner and by the  person in charge of any motor vehicle to prevent 
the unnecessary discharge of the products of combustion, steam, or lubricating oil on any highway. 
 
(3)  Any  person  who  cause  or  permits  any  motor  vehicle  to  obstruct  a public  highway  shall  be  guilty  of  an 
offence. 
 
(4)  No person shall except when directed to do so by an authorized officer in the execution of his duty cause or 
permit any motor vehicle to stand on any road during the hours of darkness otherwise than with the right or 
near side of the vehicle as close as may be to the edge of the carriageway: 
 

Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to ambulances and vehicles engaged in emergency services. 
 
20.  No  commercial  vehicle  shall  stand  or  ply  for  hire  on  any  route  other  than  that  for  which  it  is  authorized  or  as 
prescribed by the Ministry in respect of the vehicle. 
 
21.  (1) The Ministry may- 
(a)  impose tables of maximum, and where necessary, minimum fares for commercial vehicles; 
 
(b)  determine the days and hours during which commercial vehicles plying for hire on any specified route 
shall or shall not ply for hire; 
 
(c)  require  hackney  carriages  plying  for  hire  in  his  area  or  any specified  part  thereof  to  be  fitted  with  a 
meter or other device approved by him for the purpose of indicating the correct authorized fare for any 
journey. 
 
(2)  All  such  matters  shall  be  regulated  by  public  notice  and  any person  aggrieved  thereby  may  appeal  to  the 
Governor whose decision shall be final. 
 
22. (1)  Every  commercial  vehicle  shall  carry  and  exhibit  a  copy  of  the  table of  fares  and  the  time-table,  if  any, 
applicable to it printed in large and to legible type and placed in such a position on the vehicle as the Ministry may 
direct  and  every  meter  or  other  device  for  indicating  authorized  fares with  which  a  commercial  vehicle  may  be 
required to be fitted shall be maintained in good working order. 
 
(2)  Any person who shall demand or receive more than the maximum or accept less than the minimum fares so 
imposed as aforesaid shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
23. (1)  No person shall drive a  commercial  vehicle  without  having obtained from the Ministry a driver’s or rider’s 
badge as the case may be. 
 
(2)  Such badge shall only be issued to a person who holds a valid professional driver’s licence. 
 
24. (1) The Ministry shall issue such badge on payment of the  prescribed fee and on being satisfied that in addition to 
the applicant holding the appropriate driving licence he is also a fit and proper person to drive a commercial vehicle. 
 
(2)  The  Ministry  may  require  an  applicant  for  a  commercial  vehicle driver’s badge to pass a test designed  to 
demonstrate his knowledge of streets and the shortest and best routes within the area in which it is reasonable 
to suppose that he will ply for hire, and if the Ministry requires him to pass such a test and he fails to do so 
the Ministry shall not issue such badge. 
 
(3)  Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the Ministry to grant or refuse to grant such a badge may appeal 
to a magistrate, within fourteen days of the grant or refusal to grant the badge. 
 
25.      (1)  The  owner  of  commercial  vehicle  shall  from  time  to  time  submit to  the  Ministry  for  registration  the  names 
and  addresses  of  all  persons whom  he  intends  to  employ  as  conductors,  such  persons  having  attained the  age  of 
eighteen years. The Ministry, on being satisfied that such persons are fit and proper persons to be so registered shall 
thereupon, and upon payment of the prescribed fee for each registration, issue to the owner a conductor’s badge for 
each of the persons so registered. 
 
(2)  Upon any such person ceasing to act as a conductor in the employ of the owner, the owner shall so notify the 
Ministry forthwith and return the badge issued in respect of such person whereupon the Ministry shall cancel 
the registration. 
 
26.  Any badge issued in accordance with the preceding regulations shall be displayed in a conspicuous and prescribed 
manner by the driver or conductor to whom it is issued whenever, in the case of the driver, he is driving or in charge 
of a hackney or stage carriage on a highway and whenever, in the case of the conductor, he is acting as a conductor 
of a stage carriage. 
 
27.  If any driver of a hackney or stage carriage or conductor of a stage carriage to whom or in respect of whom a badge 
has  been  issued  is convicted  for  an  offence  against  these  regulations  or  the  Law  or  is considered  by  the  Ministry 
which issued the badge to be unsuitable to drive or be in charge of such a vehicle, as the case may be, the licensing 
authority may, if he thinks fit, require the surrender of such badge even if in the case of a driver the licence to drive 
a motor vehicle has not been suspended or revoked by the court in accordance with the provisions of the Law, and 
such driver or conductor shall surrender such badge accordingly: 
 
Provided that the driver or conductor may, within eight days of receiving a demand from the Ministry to surrender 
the badge, appeal against such demand to a magistrate. 
 

28.  The driver of any hackney or stage carriage  shall at all times when the produced vehicle is on a highway carry the 
hackney  or  stage  carriage  licence  issued on  demand.  in  respect  of  the  vehicle  and  shall  produce  such  licence  on 
demand by an authorized officer in uniform. 
 
29.  No owner, driver or conductor or person acting on behalf of the owner, of noises to driver or conductor of a hackney 
or stage carriage standing or plying for attract hire shall- 
 
(a)  speak, make any noise or sound any instrument in order to attract the attention of the public or of a possible 
passenger; or 
 
(b)  act  in  any  way  so  as  to  make  himself  objectionable  or  a nuisance  to  any  person  or  so  as  to  cause  any 
annoyance or inconvenience to any person. 
 
30.  The driver of a hackney or stage carriage shall not smoke whilst driving the vehicle. 
 
31.  It is an offence to  
 
(a)  sell or offer for sale alcoholic drink, herbal and pharmaceutical drug or drink within 100 metres of a bus stop, 
a bus terminus or a park for commercial vehicles; 
 
(b)  trade, hawk, vend or offer for sale any item of goods or services, or to beg or solicit for alms, or to engage in 
cleaning  of the  windscreen  of  a  vehicle  or  any  other  part  of  a  vehicle  on  any  of the  roads  and  bridges 
specified in Schedule II to this Law. 
 
32.  (1) The drivers of the first two hackney carriages on a stand shall stay beside their vehicles and must be ready to be 
hired at once by any person. 
 
(2)  If  any  person  wishes  to  engage  a  hackney  carriage  of  a  particular seating  capacity  or  type  and  if  such  a 
hackney  carriage  is  not  the  first  one on  the  stand,  the  driver  of  the  first  hackney  carriage  of  the  required 
seating capacity or type on the stand shall accept the hire and it shall be unlawful for any other driver to do 
so. 
 
(3)  All hackney carriages on the stand must move up as vacancies occur. 
 
33.  No  driver  of  a  hackney  carriage  while  hired  shall  unless  requested  by  the hirer,  stop  his  vehicle  for  a  longer  time 
than  is  reasonably  necessary  and  if is not  hired  he  shall  not  stop  his  vehicle  except  on  a  public  stand  nor  shall  he 
loiter when driving his vehicle on a highway when not hired. 
 
34.  The driver of a hackney carriage shall not without reasonable excuse— 
 
(a)  refuse to be hired when the vehicle is on the stand; 
 
(b)  refuse  to  drive  the  vehicle  to  any  place  indicated  by  the hirer  if  the  whole  journey  including  the  return 
journey does not exceed twenty-five miles; 
 
(c)  refuse to carry such number of passengers not exceeding the number specified in the licence for the vehicle 
as he may be required to carry by the hirer. 
 
35.  If the driver of a hackney carriage or the conductor or driver of a stage carriage finds any property left in the vehicle 
after the completion of a journey he shall without undue delay take the same to the nearest authorized station. 
 
36.  (1) The maximum number of persons allowed to be carried at any one time in a  hackney or stage carriage shall be 
determined by the licensing authority and shall be inscribed on the hackney or stage carriage licence and clearly and 
legibly painted on the vehicle in the manner as may be prescribed by the Ministry. 
 
(2)  Save as provided in regulation 37 each passenger shall be provided with seating accommodation, the supports 
of which shall be firmly fixed in position. A width of fourteen inches and depth of at least ten inches shall be 
respectively allowed for the seating accommodation of each passenger. In the case of seats facing in the same 
direction a  clear space  of at  least ten inches shall be  allowed between the  foremost part of one  seat and the 
rear  part  of  the  seat  in  front  and  in  the  case  of  seats  arranged facing  each  other  a  clear  space  of  at  least 
nineteen inches shall be allowed between the front edge of one seat and the front edge of the seat facing it. 
 
(3) In  the  case  of  vehicles  intended  for  the  carriage  of  mixed  loads  of passengers  and  goods  the  seats  may  be 
movable  provided  that  each  such seat  is  so  constructed  as  to  be  capable  of  being  firmly;  fixed  in  position 
when its use is required and provided also that when such seat is so used it shall be so firmly fixed. 
 
(4)  The  driver’s  seat  in  a  stage  carriage  carrying  goods  or passengers or  in  a  vehicle  carrying  goods  and 
passengers shall be not less than two feet wide and shall be so constructed as to allow a space of at least one 

foot  on  each  side  of  the  steering  column.  Such  seat  shall  be  divided  off from  any  seating  accommodation 
provided  for  any  person sitting  in  the driver’s compartment by a fixed partition at least fifteen inches in 
height from the level of the seat and no person except the driver shall occupy the driver’s seat. 
 
(5)  In any case where the driver’s seat is so partitioned off, one person only may sit in the remaining portion of 
the  driving  compartment  if  the seat  provided  is  not  less  than  fourteen  inches  but  less  than  twenty-eight 
inches.  If  such  seat  is  not  less  than  twenty-eight  inches  in  width,  then  not more  than  two  persons  may  sit 
thereon. 
 
(6)  (a) Each person shall be taken as weighing 168 lb. which shall include an allowance of 28 lb. hand luggage, 
and in no case shall the number of persons to be carried at any one time exceed the number determined by 
dividing  the  registered  freight  or  load  which the  vehicle  is  constructed  to  carry  expressed  in  pounds 
avoirdupois by the number 168. 
 
  (b) Two children under the age of twelve years shall be taken as one person. 
 
37.  In  calculating  the  number  of  persons  that  an  omnibus  may  be  allowed  to carry,  the  Ministry  may  take  into 
consideration the standing room available for passengers in addition to the actual available seating 
 
38.  A  stage  carriage  carrying  only  goods  shall  be  permitted  to  carry  a  weight freight  equal  to  its  registered  freight  or 
load.  In  the  case  of  a  vehicle  carrying and  persons  as  well  as  goods,  the  total  combined  weight  of  the  persons 
calculated  with  hand  luggage  at  168  lb.  each  and  goods  shall  not  exceed the  registered  freight  or  load  of  such 
vehicle: 
 
Provided that the number of persons carried on such vehicle shall not exceed the maximum number allowed by the 
Ministry and provided also that proper seating accommodation is available for each passenger. 
 
 
39.  No person shall, while he is travelling in or upon a stage carriage- 
 
(a)  use any obscene, indecent, offensive or quarrelsome language or gesture, or behave in any manner likely to 
annoy or to insult any other person; or 
 
(b)  willfully interfere with the comfort of any passenger; or 
 
(c)  spit upon or out of or willfully soil any part of the stage carriage; or 
 
(d)  willfully damage or deface the stage carriage or any part thereof or any part of its equipment; or 
 
(e)  willfully  do  or  cause  to  be  done  with  respect  to  any  part  of the  stage  carriage  or  of  its  equipment  anything 
which  is  calculated to  obstruct  or  interfere  with  the  working  of  the  stage  carriage  or  to cause  injury  or 
discomfort to any person; or 
 
(f)  willfully obstruct or impede the driver or conductor in the exercise of his duty; or 
 
(g)  enter into conversation with the driver of the stage carriage while it is in motion; or 
 
(h)  smoke or carry a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette in any part of the stage carriage in which a notice prohibiting 
smoking is exhibited; or 
 
(i)  sell or offer for sale or distribute any goods or any printed matter of any description; or 
 
(j)  throw out any article from any part of the stage carriage; or 
 
(k) refuse to pay his fare when lawfully demanded. 
 
40.  No person shall- 
 
(a)  cause or permit any vehicle to stand or ply for hire which is not licensed under this Part of these regulations; 
 
(b)  cause or permit any vehicle to stand or ply for hire which does not carry an identification plate as provided in 
this Part of these regulations; 
 
(c)  cause or permit any vehicle to ply for hire without exhibiting the table of fares and time-table, if any, and the 
number of persons the vehicle is licensed to carry; 
 
(d)  cause  or permit any hackney  carriage  which under these regulations is required to be  fitted  with a  meter or 
other device for indicating authorised fares to stand or ply for hire without such a meter or device in proper 

working order, or, while hired, fail to bring such meter or device into operation, or alter, damage or interfere 
in any way with the proper operation of such meter or device; 
 
(e)  cause or permit any hackney or stage carriage to stand for passengers at any place except at a stand appointed 
by the licensing authority; 
 
(f)  while in charge of a stage carriage take up or set down passengers except at the stopping places prescribed by 
the Ministry; 
 
(g)  drive or be in charge of, any motor vehicle on a highway, standing or plying for hire without carrying on his 
person or in the vehicle the hackney or stage carriage licence; 
 
(h)  drive  or  be  in  charge  of, any  motor  vehicle  on  a  highway standing  or  plying  for  hire  without  wearing  the 
prescribed driver’s badge; 
 
(i)  act as a conductor of a stage carriage without being registered by the licensing authority; 
 
(j)  act as a conductor of a stage carriage without wearing the prescribed conductor’s badge; 
 
(k)  employ as a conductor of a stage carriage a person who is not registered by the licensing authority; 
 
(l)  while in charge of a hackney or stage carriage contravene or permit any contravention of these regulations; 
 
(m)  .while  in  charge  of  a  hackney  or  stage  carriage  cause  or permit  a  breach  of  any  condition  attached  to  the 
licence issued in respect of such carriage. 
 
41. (1)  No  person  shall  operate  or  cause  to  be  operated  a  commercial vehicle  without  having obtained  a  commercial 
vehicle operator licence from the Ministry. 
 
(2)  The Ministry may not issue a commercial vehicle operator licence in respect of a vehicle unless such vehicle 
has been inspected and certified by the Vehicle Inspection Service. 
 
(3)  The  Ministry  shall  refuse  a  licence  to,  or  if  already  issued,  suspend the  licence,  of  any  vehicle  found  to  be 
unfit for operation as a commercial vehicle after due inspection. 
 
(4)  Every licence issued under this Part shall bear a distinct number which shall be painted conspicuously on the 
front and rear part of the vehicle or in any other manner as may be prescribed by the Ministry. 
 
(5)  A licence issued under this Part shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
 
42.  Except  as  may  be  prescribed  by  Motor  Vehicle  Administration  Agency, Lagos  State  Signage  and  Advertisement 
Agency  or  any  other  agency  of the  State  the  use  of  marks,  stickers,  slogans,  symbols,  paintings,  photos etc.  on 
commercial vehicles is prohibited. 
 
 
43.  A vehicle shall not be used or operated for commercial purposes unless:- 
 
(1)  The vehicle is registered as commercial vehicle with the Lagos State Motor Vehicle Administration Agency; 
 
(2)  The vehicle is branded in the specific colour as prescribed by the Ministry; 
 
(3)  The driver holds a current certificate issued by the Lagos State Drivers’ Institute in addition to possession of 
a valid class “E” driver’s license; and 
 
(4)  The vehicle is fitted with a waste basket, fire extinguisher and First Aid box. 
 
44.  (1)  In  the  case  of  a  commercial  vehicle  no  person  may  drive  or  cause or  permit  any person  employed  by  him  to 
drive- 
 
(a)  subject to the provisions of paragraph (2), for any continuous period of more than five and one-half hours; or 
 
(b)  subject to the provisions of paragraph (3), for periods amounting in the aggregate to more than ten and one-
half hours in any period of twenty-four hours commencing two hours after midnight; or 
 
(c)  so  that  the  driver  has  not  at  least  eight  consecutive  hours for  rest  in  any  period  of twenty-four  hours 
calculated from the commencement of any period of driving. 
 

(2)  Where in any such period of twenty-four hours one period of duty only is worked not exceeding eight hours 
in  length  then  such  period  may, subject  to  the  provisions  of  sub-paragraph  (c)  of  paragraph  (1)  be  worked 
instead of the period specified in sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph (1): 
 
Provided that the driver is allowed intervals of rest and time for refreshment of not less than forty minutes in 
the  aggregate  and  one  of  such intervals  is  of  not  less  than  twenty  minutes  to  be  taken  not  earlier  than  two 
hours after the beginning nor later than five hours after the beginning of the eight-hour period of duty. 
 
(3)  Where it is necessary for a driver to conclude a long distance journey the period specified in sub-paragraph 
(b) of paragraph (1) may be extended to a period which shall not exceed twelve-and-a-half hours in all. 
 
(4)  For the purpose of this regulation- 
 
(a)  any two or more periods of driving time shall be deemed to be a continuous period unless separated; 
 
(b)  any time spent by a driver on other work in connection with a commercial vehicle or the load carried 
thereby shall be reckoned as time spent in driving. 
 
(5)  If any person acts in contravention of this regulation he shall be guilty of an offence: 
 
Provided that a person shall not be liable to be convicted under this regulation if he proves to the court that 
the contravention was due to unavoidable delay in the completion of any journey arising out of circumstances 
which he could not reasonably have foreseen. 
 
(6)  This regulation shall not apply to motor vehicles used for fire brigade or ambulance purposes or to vehicles 
other than commercial vehicles. 
 
45.  Where under the Law or these regulations it is required that a motor vehicle or trailer shall have painted or marked 
thereon any words, letters, vehicles figures or symbol the owner shall cause such words, letters, figures or symbol to 
be  repainted  or  otherwise  marked  from,  time  to  time  as  often  as may  be  necessary  to  keep  the  said  words,  letters, 
figures or symbol legible and clearly distinguishable. 
 
46.  (1) The Ministry or any authorised officer may inspect any motor inspect vehicles. vehicle or trailer with a view to 
ascertaining  whether  the  provisions  of  the Law  or  of  any  regulation  made  or  permit  issued  there under  are  being 
complied  with, and in the  event of any non-compliance  with any of the said provisions such licensing authority or 
authorised officer may by an order in writing prohibit the  further use of such motor vehicle or trailer until the said 
provisions have been complied with to his satisfaction. Any person using or permitting to be used a motor vehicle or 
trailer in contravention of any such order shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
(2)  An authorised officer in uniform may stop any motor vehicle with a view to ascertaining whether such motor 
vehicle  or  any  trailer  drawn thereby  is  being  used  in  contravention  of  the  Law  or  any  regulation  made or 
permit  or  licence  issued  thereunder,  and  in  the  event  of  any  motor vehicle  or  trailer  being  used  in  such 
manner  an  authorised  officer  may  take the  motor  vehicle  and  trailer  or  cause  them  to  be  taken  to  any 
authorised station or place of safety there  to be  detained until the  motor vehicle  or trailer and driver can be 
identified, and further, any such licensing authority or authorised officer may require a commercial vehicle to 
be brought  for  weighing  or  re-weighing  to  such  place  as  the  licensing authority  or  authorised  officer  may 
direct. 
 
(3)  The owner or driver of any motor vehicle shall, on demand by any authorised officer, produce such vehicle or 
any trailer drawn thereby at such time and place as the authorised officer may appoint and submit it for such 
inspection  and  test  as  may  be  required  with  a  view  to ascertaining whether  the  provisions  of  the  Law  or  of 
any regulation or permit or licence issued there under are being complied with. 
 
47.  In this part- 
 
“vehicle” has the meaning assigned to it in section 41 of the Law except that it does not include a motor vehicle or 
trailer. 
 
48.  The driver, rider or person having control of any vehicle on any highway shall- 
 
(a)  make use of the prescribed hand-signals for drivers of motor vehicles in these regulations; 
 
(b)  between sunset  and sunrise  show a  white light to the  front sufficient to  warn persons on the  highway and a 
red light or red reflex glass to the rear; 
 
(c)  except when overtaking traffic proceeding in the same direction, keep to the right of the road; 
 
(d)  when overtaking traffic proceeding in the same direction pass such traffic only on the left or off-side thereof; 

 
(e)  whenever  necessary,  give  audible  and  sufficient  warning  of approach  by  sounding  the  bell,  horn  or  other 
appliance with which such vehicle is required by these regulations to be fitted; 
 
(f) shall comply with the prescribed traffic signs placed on or near any highway by order of the Ministry or other 
authority responsible for the maintenance of the highway for the guidance of drivers of vehicles 
 
49. No Person shall on any Highway- 
 
(a) ride  a  bicycle  not  fitted  with  at  least  one  efficient  brake  and  an  efficient  bell,  horn  or  other  appliances  for 
giving audible warning of approach; 
 
(b) ride a bicycle of which at least nine inches of the lowest part of the rear mudguard is not painted white on the 
outside; 
 
(c) fasten an animal so as to obstruct, endanger or annoy any person lawfully using such highway; 
 
(d) propel any go-cart, rickshaw, barrow, truck, handcart or similar vehicle otherwise than by holding the pole or 
shaft; 
 
(f) ride or drive furiously any animal or vehicle or drive at a speed of more than eight miles an hour any vehicle 
carrying a load which projects three feet or more beyond either end of such vehicle; 
 
(g) wilfully by negligence prevents, hinder or interrupt the free passage of any person or vehicle or animal; 
 
(h)  draw up any vehicle so as to obstruct free passage along a street; 
 
(i) Drive,  ride,  propel  or  park  any  vehicle  or  animal  on  any  footway  or  pavement  provided  for  the  use  of 
pedestrian provided for the use of pedestrian; 
 
(j) whilst riding a bicycle hold on to any motor vehicle or other vehicle while it is on the move. 
 
50. Any person who fails to comply with acts in contravention of any conditions attached to any licence or permit issued 
under these Regulations shall be guilty of an offence. 
 
51. The  penalties  for  offences  under  these  Regulations,  where  no  other  penalties  are  provided,  shall  be  as  prescribed 
under Section 36 of the Law 
 
------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
The printed impression has been compared by me with the Bill which has been passed by the Lagos state House of Assembly and found by me to be a true 
and correct printed copy of the said Bill 
 
G.O. Abiru 
Acting Clerk of the House of Assembly 