

1 
 
 
 
 
 
2024 
COMPENDIUM 
FOR 
RCs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
1. HIGHWAY CODE LITERACY 
1.1 SPEED LIMITS 
Speed  limit  is  a maximum  speed  a category of  vehicle  can  travel  on  a road  under 
ideal  condition.  All  categories  of  vehicles  have  specific  speed  limits  as  shown  in 
the table below: 
 
 
1.2 DRIVING UNDER SPECIAL CONDITIONS 
Driving  under  special  conditions  involves  driving  under  unusual  or  emergency 
situations.  This  requires  extra  care,  concentration,  discipline  and  consideration. 
Special driving conditions include the following: 
i. Night Time Driving 
Night  driving is  two  to  three  times  more dangerous  than  day  time  driving due  to 
poor   visibility   hence,   extra   care   is   required.The   following   measures   are 
recommended: 
a. Lower  the  beams  of  headlamps  for  both  oncoming  vehicles  and  the ones  in 
front. 
b. Reduce speed and lower beam in foggy weather. 
c. Use  high-beam  when  it  is  safe  to  do  so,  especially  when  there  is  no 
approaching vehicle. 
d. Avoid looking directly into the lights of oncoming vehicles, watch the right-
hand edge of the road. 
e. Keep headlamps properly adjusted/focused. 
f. f  Keep  wind  screen  clean.  Slow  down  when  facing  glare  fromoncoming 
headlights. 
ii. Driving in the Rain 

3 
 
Rain reduces visibility. Also, grip of a tyre (traction) reduces as the road becomes 
wet and slippery. While driving in the rain, stopping distance may become four or 
more timeslonger as on dry road. Consider the following: 
a. Reduce speed to enhance firm control. 
b. Drive in track of other vehicles ahead. Increase following distance. 
c. Ensure that headlamps are on so as to see and be seen by others. 
d. Use  wipers  to  clean  windscreen  and  heater  or  air  conditioner  to  remove 
mist. 
iii. Driving in Fog or Smoke 
Fog or smoke reduces visibility. Thefollowing precautions are recommended: 
a. Slowdown. 
b. Turn on low beam headlamps. 
c. Be prepared to stop at very short notice. 
d. If too dense, pull off the road as soon as it is safe to do so. 
e. Turn on the hazard lights. 
iv. Driving Under Sun Glare 
Strong sun glare at sunrise and sunset may interfere with your vision. Sun glare is 
worse oncracked or dirty windscreen. 
a. Make use of sun visors or sunglasses, if necessary. 
b. Reduce speed for better vision and reaction. 
v. Driving While Approaching a Hill 
Motorists  experience  limited  vision  as  they  approach  the  crest  of  a  hill.  The 
steeper  the  gradient  of  a  hill, the  less  the  visibility  ahead.  Choose  appropriate 
speed and position that will best enable prompt response to hazards. 
vi. Driving While Approaching Blind Turns 
Drive cautiously on blind turns as vision along the path of travel may be blocked by 
shrubs and other objects. 
vii. Driving on a Busy Road 
High  vehicular  density,  pedestrian  traffic  and  limited  space  for  maneuver  make 
driving on busy streets challenging. Frequent intersections, traffic lights and road 
signs interrupt traffic flow. 
a. Be alert to pedestrians stepping into traffic even if illegally. 
b. Regulate speed especially when behind taxis and cyclists. 
c. Be careful to obey speed limits even when traffic is light. 

4 
 
viii. Driving in Slow Traffic 
In  slow  moving  traffic,  especially  on  single  carriage  roads, motorists  may  find 
themselves stuck behind slow moving vehicles such as tractors, heavy-duty trucks 
and articulated vehicles. 
a. Safely  pass  if  the  vehicle  ahead  pulls  over.  Do  not  get  too  close  to  the 
vehicle ahead before overtaking. 
b. Where the vehicle ahead does not pull over, answer the following questions 
beforeovertaking: 
i. Is it legal to overtake? 
ii. Is it safe? 
iii. Is it necessary? 
ix. Animals in Traffic 
Presence of animals such as herds of cows or other stray animals on the road may 
create "unexpected" hazards which require quick decision on safe evasive actions. 
a. Make sound judgment in stopping or making other maneuvers. 
b. Be sure vehicles behind will be able to stop without crashing. 
c. Never swerve into oncoming vehicle lane or switch lane without considering 
inherent dangers. 
x. Driving in Unfamiliar or on Bad Roads 
Every  driver  must  be  extra  careful  when  driving  on  an  unfamiliar  or  bad  roads. 
Potholes,  uneven  road  surface,  gradients  and  curves  on  unfamiliar  roads  can  be 
hazardous.  
a. Reduce speed before entering a curve. 
b. Be alert to road signs forewarning of dangerous road conditions. 
c. Obey posted speed limits. 
d. Adopt common sense speed limit especially when entering and leaving built-
up areas. 
xi. Convoy Driving 
This  is  driving  in  a  company  of  two  or  more vehicles  from  same  starting  point, 
maintaining  same  speed  and  heading  for  the  same  destination.  It  is  a  highly 
demanding exercise requiring experience and discipline. Irrespective of mission or 
type, convoy operatorsare also expected to obey basic road safety rules. 
a. Obey recommended speed limits. 
b. Keep safe distance (following distance) from the vehicle ahead. 
c. Communication via radio frequency must be short and fast. 
d. Do not constitute hazard to other road users or chase them off the road. 

5 
 
e. Convoy driving should not be an excuse for road rage and aggressive driving. 
f. Avoid tailgating. 
g. Be attentive and alert at all times. 
h. In  busy  towns,  slow  down,  close  up  the  convoy  to  reduce  the  length  and 
enable other road users get through. 
i. Convoy  drivers  are  not  exempted from  obeying  road  traffic  rules  and 
regulations. 
Always  pay  extra  attention  in  built  up  areas  or  when  driving  under  special 
conditions. 
 
1.3 CAUSES OF RTC 
After several researches, causes of road traffic crashes have been grouped into 
three according to the causative factors. These factors are: 
 Human factor 
 Mechanical factor 
 Environmental factor 
a. Human  Factor – Human  factor contributes  to  about  90%  of  the  road 
crashes. Drivers alone contribute about 80% to the crashes. Some of the specific 
causes are, overconfidence, speed, lack of concentration, tiredness, driving under 
the influence of drugs or alcohol, poor vehicle care, indiscriminate parking, wrong 
or dangerous overtaking, passengers distraction, and pedestrian behavior. 
b. Mechanical  Factor – Mechanical  factor has  been  known  to  contribute  in 
about  10%  of  the  crashes  on  our  roads.  Crashes  due  to  this  factor  have  the 
following as some of the causes: 
 Malfunctioning of engine 
 Poor steering mechanism 
 Tyre burst 
 Brake failure 
c. Environmental  Factors – Environmental  factor  refers  to  road  elements 
including weather that contributes to crashes.  

6 
 
 

7 
 
1.4 DEFENSIVE DRIVING TECHNIQUES 
Defensive Driving is driving in a manner that utilizes safe driving skills to scan, 
identify, predict and avoid potential hazards. A defensive driver is one who 
deploys defensive driving skills to ensure his safety and other road users. 
 
Qualities of a Defensive Driver 
a. Always anticipate the action of other road users. 
b. Adequate understanding of the Highway Code and obedience to traffic laws 
and regulations. 
c. Makes allowance for personal deficiencies and other road users‟ lack of 
skills and knowledge”. 
d. Be ready to give concessions and yield right of way to avoid collision. 
e. Quickly understand and adapt to road conditions. 
f. Always be patient while driving. 
 
Important Reminders for Defensive Drivers 
a. Road Traffic crashes are not accident, they are caused 
b. Other road users may lack skills, adequate knowledge of traffic laws and 
regulations. Be careful. 
 
1.5 REQUIREMENTS FOR TOURISTS IN NIGERIA 
A Tourist is a person travelling or visiting a place for pleasure. When visiting 
Nigeria, ensure the following: 
a. Get a road map and be familiar with the road network 
b. Show evidence that you are permitted to use the vehicle temporarily in 
Nigeria 
c. Show evidence of your permit to stay in Nigeria 
d. Ensure that the vehicle is road worthy and has the following: 
i. Vehicle Licence 
ii. Vehicle Inspection Certificate 
iii. Proof of Ownership Certificate 
iv. Road Worthiness Certificate 
v. Road Worthiness Validity Tag 
vi. National Vehicle Identification tag and; 
vii. Insurance Certificate 
viii. Any other relevant vehicle documents 
e. That such a vehicle carries the number plate of the country of its origin 
affixed at the appropriate spaces at the front and rear of the vehicle 
f. Seek to obtain permit drive in Nigeria within 15 days 

8 
 
g. Within 30 days of your stay, obtain the National Driver‟s Licence for the 
category of your vehicle 
h. Within 90 days of your stay in Nigeria, change the number plate to Nigeria 
number plate 
i. That you have the Country‟s International Driving Permit in addition to your 
country‟s driver‟s licence 
j. If you are representing your company/organization, ensure you have the 
details of your country‟s embassy or consulate and any agent your 
company/organization has in Nigeria. This could be useful to you in case of 
emergencies. 
k. Drive carefully and obey all rules and regulations. 
1.6 SERVICES FOR THE PHYSICALLY CHALLENGED 
 Road  users  who  require  special  consideration  as  regards  applications  for 
drivers  licence  or  testing  must  notify  appropriate authorities  of  their 
challenges. 
 A  qualified  medical  doctor  must  certify  the  extent  of  challenge(s)  and 
capability of the applicant to drive. 
 They are to ensure reconstruction of the vehicle to suit their conditions, if 
necessary. 
 They  are  to  obtain  appropriate  physically  challenged  person  identification 
stickers from the FRSC or VIO and affixed conspicuously on the front and 
rear wind screen vehicle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
2. PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
Performance Management System involves a process of measuring effectiveness 
and efficiency of an individual staff which culminates into the overall achievement 
of the Corporate Performance Management scorecard. It aims to tie the day-to-
day activities and targets of individual staff to the realization of the corporate 
objectives of an organization. 
2.1 STRUCTURE OF APER 
Supervisors are expected to appraise subordinates in the following areas 
depending on their cadres.  Below are the attributes with their definitions: 
OFFICERS (FRSC ADM 01) 
PART 1 
Key Deliverables (20%): Delivery on assigned key performance indicators (KPIs) 
task and assignment. 
PART II 
A. Generic Organizational Competencies (60% and 40% for ACC - above): 
i. Interpersonal Skills – Shows respect and consideration in dealing with 
others.  
ii. Verbal Communication Skills – Communicates clearly in English Language with 
confidence    
       and has a broad use of vocabulary. 
iii.   Written Communication Skills – Writes in a concise and articulated 
manner. 
iv.   Personal Organizational Skills – Plans proactively and effectively. 
v. ICT Skills – Is familiar with the functioning of a computer system  and 
is comfortable     
       using email for communication. 
vi.    Customer Service Skills – Is customer focus and as such sensitive to 
customer needs. 
vii. Time Management Skills – Is punctual to work, meetings, etc and realistic in 
making   
        commitments. 
viii.   Team Work: Keen to offer assistance and carries people along. 
ix. Personal Leadership Skills – Is able to lead self towards the achievement of 
personal  
       vision and targets in spite of challenges. 
x. Bearing and Grooming Skills – Always appears neat and well turned  out in 
clean, well  
        ironed uniforms, impeccably groomed hairs, nails and other body parts. 

10 
 
B. Job Specific Competencies (20% for all officers): 
i. Technical Writing Skills – Style of writing peculiar to a profession or 
functions. 
ii. Supervisory Skills – Providing superior direction, input and guidance to sub-
ordinates in the day to day delivery or assignments. 
iii. Strategic Planning Skills – Evaluates processes for defining strategy and 
direction as  
       well as allocating resources to implement same successfully. 
iv. Creativity/Innovation – Development of new ideas and unique novel 
solutions to problem  
       or needs. 
v.     Intelligence Gathering – Gathering timely and accurate security related 
information. 
vi.     Technology Competencies – Specific IT Skills required for delivery work 
processes. 
vii.    Arbitration Skills – Alternative dispute resolution, mediation and negotiation 
skills. 
viii.   Conceptual Skills – Ability to think and conceptualize abstract and complex 
issues. 
ix.  Facilitation Skills – Presentation, coaching, engagement skills and 
processes for  
        maximizing a group‟s discussion outcome. 
x.     Accounting Skills – Recording, reporting and analyzing financial transaction. 
xi.  Budget Skills – Knowledge, skill and processes for measuring and reporting 
financial  
        compliance. 
 
C. Leadership and Management Competencies - 20% (ACC and above only): 
i. Management/Team Building Skills – Resourcefulness, motivations. 
ii. Leadership Skills – Inspires positive confidence for others to follow. 
iii. Strategic Thinking Skills – Considers both short and long term effective 
analysis of  
       macro-environment. 
iv.   Dynamic Skills – Effectively makes useful contact within and outside the 
organization.  
 
ROAD MARSHAL (FRSC ADM 02)  
A. AGREED DELIVERABLES (20%): Delivery on assigned key performance 
indicators (KPIs) task  and assignment. 

11 
 
B.   CORE ATTRIBUTE AND SKILLS (80%):  
i.    Service Attitude - Maintains an enthusiastic and positive attitude; always in 
self control.  
ii. Punctuality - Consistently arrives at work on time, keeps committed 
deadlines and  
       promptly responds to official request.   
iii. Policy Alignment - Deems it important to follow FRSC policies and 
procedures; does not  
       disregard rules and regulations of the office. 
iv.   Working with others/Team spirit – is focused on the teams targets and 
objectives.  
v.    Creativity - is innovative; thinking outside the box. 
vi.   Neatness/Carriage - Uniform is always clean and neatly ironed, hair and other 
assets are  
       well managed. 
vii.  Verbal Communication - Speaks good English; Presents information clearly and 
logically. 
viii. Writing Skills - Writes comfortably in English; is able to prepare official 
reports with  
       zero or minimal correction. 
ix. ICT Skills - Able to use Microsoft word and other Microsoft packages; uses 
the internet effectively in the course of work. 
x. Ethics and Values - He is clearly regarded as an epitome and model of 
integrity and trustworthiness.  
xi. Personal Organization and Diligence - Organizes self and others effectively; 
is consistent in achieving goals.  
xii. Leadership - Show an effective blend of high competence and exemplary 
character in all things assigned. He is self-determined, but moves colleagues 
towards common goals. 
xiii. Self-Improvement and Learning - Shows a willingness to improve self and to 
learn          
        new skills through both informal and formal means.  
 
ROAD MARSHAL ASSISTANT (FRSC ADM 03) 
A. AGREED ACTIVITIES (50%):  Delivery on assigned key performance 
indicators (KPIs); task and assignments. 
B. CORE ATTRIBUTES AND SKILLS (50%): 
i. Technical Skills – Indicate technical skill e.g. driving. 

12 
 
ii.  Punctuality and Attendance - Arrives at work on time; keeps to earlier 
arranged timing schedules for his work deliverables. 
iii.   Ethics and Values - he is principled; maintains acceptable standards of 
behavior. 
iv. Discipline and Personal Organization - Respects duly constituted authority; 
willingly obey orders.  
v.     Dressing/Comportment - Dress appropriately; looks clean and tidy at work.  
vi.    Team Work - Always willing to cooperate and lend a hand in all situations. 
vii.    Customer service Skills - Is friendly and respectful when providing service.  
viii.   Policy alignment - Deems it important to follow organization policies and 
procedures; is   
        obedient to the guidelines of the organization.  
ix.    Self Improvement and Learning - Shows a willingness to improve self and to 
learn new   
        skills through both formal and informal means.  
x.     Verbal Communication - Speaks good English; provides information clearly and 
logically.  
 
2.2 JOB BINDER 
This document contains the job functions/specifications of each Staff with the 
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) i.e. expected deliverables.  The KPIs must 
conform with the SMART acronym i.e. the KPIs must be: 
 *SPECIFIC   (S) 
 *MEASURABLE   (M) 
 *ACHIEVABLE  (A) 
 *REALISTIC  (R) and 
 *TIME-BOUND  (T) 
Employee performance management is a process for establishing performance 
yardsticks at an individual level, which are related to and directly linked with the 
Corporate performance measures or yardsticks for the period.  In addition to 
improving the strategic governance of an organization, this is expected to also 
create a shared understanding by all Staff, of how their individual responsibilities 
contribute to the corporate objectives – in the alternative, can limit or impede the 
achievement of same if not diligently pursued. 
2.3 CORPORATE GOALS 
Having the vision, mission and core values of FRSC in view, the Corps Marshal at 
the beginning of each year presents the overarching corporate strategic 

13 
 
thrust/corporate goal for the year. Then, the Corps Planning offices develops the 
corporate planning document and process for the realization of these goal. The 
corporate goals are cascaded across Departments, Corps Offices and Commands. 
Therefore, should the Corps Marshal‟s target be “to reduce road traffic crashes 
by 20% in the course of a given year”, both the routine and strategic targets of 
the various Departments, Corps Offices and Commands should directly or 
indirectly support the achievement of this goal. Below are the corporate strategic 
Goals of FRSC for 2022; 
a. Accomplish 15% reduction in Road Traffic Crash Fatality. 
b. Enhance Road Safety Partnership for Innovative Intervention. 
c. Consolidate on the Road Traffic Data System for Improved Road 
Safety Policy Formulation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
3. CONFLICT RESOLUTION IN FRSC OPERATIONS 
As  hinted  above, conflict  is  bound  to  happen  in  an  environment  where  there  are 
human interactions. FRSC is one social entity having organised activities involving a 
lot  of  people  and  its  operations  interpreted  and  appreciated  differently  by  the 
public.  The  complexities  and  characteristics  of  the  motoring  public  necessarily 
create  conflicts  of  various degrees.   If  properly managed,  conflict could  actually 
be   a   source   of   positive   change.   This   fact   underscores   the   reason   the 
understanding  of  types  of  conflicts  in  FRSC  operations  is  germaine  to  its 
management. 
3.1 TYPES OF CONFLICT IN FRSC OPERATIONS 
In  organisational  conflict and  indeed  in  FRSC,  two  basic  classifications  are  easily 
identified. They are:   
a. Intra-organisational 
b. Inter-organisational conflicts.  
Some prefer to refer to them as Internal and External conflicts.  
Intra-organisational conflict is conflict within an organization, and can be further 
classified based on scope (e.g. department, work team, individual). 
Inter-organisational  conflict  occurs  between  two  or  more  organizations,  for 
example, when different businesses compete against one another. 
For the purpose of this paper, we shall consider the causes of intra-organisational 
(internal) and inter-organisational (external) conflicts in FRSC operations 
3.2 CAUSES OF INTRA-ORGANISATIONAL OR INTERNAL CONFLICTS 
The factors responsible for intra-organizational or internal conflicts are as 
follows; 
a. Extreme or Uncontrolled Conflict: Factors such as family, social and 
emotional problems often affect FRSC staff. 
b. Strained relationship between Commanding Officers and their 
Second-in-Command. 
c. Strained relationship between Heads of Operations and patrol 
operatives. 
d. Lack of in-depth understanding of operational policies, guidelines and 
thrusts.  
e. Breakdown in relationship between patrolmen.  
f. Issue of divided loyalty in various Commands 

15 
 
3.3 CAUSES OF INTRA-ORGANISATIONAL OR EXTERNAL CONFLICTS 
Below are some of the identified causes of inter-organizational or external 
conflicts 
a. Perceptions of traffic Offenders 
b. Compromise of integrity 
c. Close relationship between staff and offenders 
d. Wrong perception of FRSC operations by other Agencies and 
organisations 
e. Hostilities and unfriendliness by host communities 
f. Unfriendly attitude of members of the political class, top civil 
servants, contractors and passengers in vehicles 
3.4 STEPS IN CONFLICT MANAGEMENT AND RESOLUTION 
Many strategies have been evolved in conflict management and resolution but for 
the purpose of this course, we will look at Maccoby and Studder to identify five 
steps to managing conflicts as follows: 
a. Anticipate – Take time to obtain information that can lead to conflict. 
b. Prevent – Develop strategies before the conflict occurs. 
c. Identify – If it is interpersonal or procedural, move to quickly 
manage it. 
d. Manage – Remember that conflict is emotional 
e. Resolve – React, without blame, and you will learn through dialogue. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
4. CRASH SCENE MANAGEMENT AND CASUALTY EVACUATION 
First aid is the emergency care given to an injured or sick person. In an emergency 
situation, a bystander knowing first aid could save someone‟s life. 
4.1 CASUALTY HANDLING 
The “ABCs” of first aid is a helpful way to easily understand and remember how to 
approach an emergency situation and what to check for. 
a. Airways 
 Tilt the head back to open the airway. 
 If anything is blocking it use a spatula to scoop it out. 
 Then turn the victim onto his side into recovery position. 
 This is done by folding one of his hands on the chest and spreading the 
other while the victim is gently rolled to side. 
 
b. Breathing 
 Watch or feel his lower chest to see if it is moving up and down. 
 You can check by putting your ear close to his face, so that you can feel 
or listen to find out if there is air coming out of his mouth. 
 If his is not breathing, give artificial respiration. The aim is to work on 
the heart when it stops working. 
 Mouth-To-Mouth insufflations and cardiac massage. 
 After  every  third  artificial  respiration,  the  first  aider  places  his  two 
palms on each other and locks them, 
 Then places them on the sternum bone of victim, depresses the sternum 
five (5) times. 
 The process is repeated until the victim is resuscitated. 
c. Circulation (Blood)  
 Check if there is a pulse.  
 You may check this by feeling the pulse near the neck or on the wrist.  
 If you can feel the pulse count the number of pulse for one minute and 
report any change the doctor when he arrives.  
 Get medical aid immediately.  
Variations on the ABC Guidelines 
There are multiple variations of the “ABCs” of first aid, but they  all  essentially 
represent the same basic concepts. 
Some places advocate for the acronym DRSABCD (like “Doctor’s ABCD”) for: 
Danger: Check the scene and the person for any possible dangers to you or them. 

17 
 
Response:  See  if  they  are  awake,  can  move  or  react,  and  if  they  can  answer 
questions. 
Send for help: Call 122 or 112 National emergency services. 
Airway: Make sure their airway is open and clear. 
Breathing:  Check  if  they  are  breathing  or  to  what  degree  they  are  struggling  to 
breathe. 
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR): If you know how to do so properly, perform 
CPR. 
Defibrillation: If you have a portable defibrillator, follow the instructions and use 
it on the person. 
Most  importantly,  in  any  emergency  situation,  try  to  stay  calm  and  approach  the 
problem  with  care.  Assess  the  situation  as  best  you  can  and  call  for  help.  Follow 
the instructions of the dispatcher or emergency personnel. 
4.2 RESCUE PROCEDURES 
Understand the environment to get necessary information about carrying out the 
rescue: 
 Know the location of the mis-happening 
 Mobilize personnel for movement 
 Get services ready i.e able mobility to carry the victim 
 Get and take investment equipment required to rescue 
 Alert relevant agencies, which might give needed support i.e, fire services, 
etc. 
 Move  to  the  accident  scene  using  authority  devices  to  clear  the  way  of 
traffic congestion where necessary 
At the accident scene one must 
 Observe the general terrain of the accident 
 Ensure  safety  of  rescue  team  by  placing  reflective  warning  signs  at  least 
100 meters away 
 Ensure high visibility of rescuer by wearing reflective jackets 
 Ensure that traffic is properly controlled and make use of communication to 
your advantage 
 Stop  vehicles  and  divert  traffic  as  the  situation  may  demand  i.e  if  the 
accident involves blocking the road. 
 Do not allow crowding of accident scene by sympathizers. 
 Identify accident victims by priority or severity of injuries 
 More victims in critical stage to hospital without delay 
 Give  first  aids  to  victims  with  injuries  of  less  severity. Dead  bodies  are 
moved last. 

18 
 
 Always  move  your  victims  to  the  nearest hospital  or  health  center  (mostly 
General Hospital). 
 Retrieve safe property, enter in the format and report at base for further 
identification of owner and relatives. 
 
4.3 RESCUE MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT 
Typically, when you think “emergency rescue”, first responders like firefighters, 
police  and  EMS  professionals  are  who come  to  mind. While  yes,  it‟s  true  that 
search   and   rescue   is   part   of   their   jobs,   anyone   can   be   involved   in an 
emergency situation where  someone  needs rescued  or  helped.  For  example,  if  you 
are in a car accident you may need to get yourself and others to safety; or, if you 
witness a sports accident or child injury at the park, you may need to offer first 
aid.  
Whether it‟s  for your career  or  not,  rescue preparedness  is good  to  know. We‟ve 
put  together  a  list  of recommended items to  have  on  hand for both the rookie 
rescuers and the professionals.  
Rescue materials and equipment 
Think  of  Emergency  Rescue  Equipment as equipment that  has  the  sole  purpose  of 
treating or preventing injury. Regardless of the environment or location, here are 
the must-have items for successful RTC rescue operations: 
 First Aid Kits 
 Knife/Scissors  
 Stretcher 
 Blanket 
 Gloves 
 Splint  
 Reflective caution signs and Flare 
 Fire extinguisher  
 Torchlight with spare batteries 
 Body bags 
 Fire-man Axe 
 Matchets 
 Reflective tape/Cones 
 Reflective Jackets 
 Cervical Collar 
 Extricating machine 
 
4.4 Extrication Techniques 
 
Extrication  is  the process  of  removing  a  vehicle  from  around  a  person  who  has 
been  involved  in  a  crash  when  conventional  means  of  exit  are  impossible  or 
inadvisable. 

19 
 
The following are the techniques required to carry out a successful extrication: 
a. Stabilize the vehicle where it lies as movement may exacerbate injury. 
b. Make the vehicle safe: switch off the ignition, immobilize the battery, and 
swill away any petrol. 
c. Identify the time-critical victims 
d. Read the wreckage 
e. Try the easiest way into the vehicle first. 
f. Remove  the wreckage  from  the  casualty  and  not  the  casualty  from  the 
wreckage 
g. Do not move from one entrapment situation into another 

20 
 
5. FRSC EDUCATION POLICY 
All   over   the   world   education   stand   as   the   major   factor   in   the   drive   to 
development.  A  nation  or  organization cannot  strive  to  greatness  without  paying 
much  attention  to  the  education  of  citizen  or  workforce.  FGN  (1998)  stressed 
that  education  is  an  instrument  for  national  development.  It  fosters  the  worth 
and  development  of  the  individual,  for  each  individuals  sake  and  for  the  general 
development  of  the  society.  It  can  be  confirmed  from  this  that  education 
develops   a   man   for   self-fulfillment,   societal   development   and   for   national 
advancement 
 
5.1 IMPORTANCE OF TRAINING 
a. Enhance interest in one‟s job 
b. Removes negative attitude to work 
c. Improves performance and productivity 
d. Removes tardiness 
e. Checkmates excessive absenteeism 
f. Discourage complaints 
g. Improves quality of output 
h. Reduces incidence of accident at work  
i. Reduce rate of insubordination 
j. Brings about easy adaption to new technology  
k. Enhances efficient implementation of new policies 
 
5.2 GUIDELINES FOR TRAINING PROGRAMMES IN FRSC 
a. Courses  to  be  pursued  shall  be  progressive  and  targeted  essentially 
at development staff and knowledge, so as to improve proficiency. 
b. Courses  to  be  pursued  shall  be  relevant  schedule  or  preparatory  to 
taking up a new schedule. 
c. A staff shall qualify to pursue further studies  on part-time basis in 
any  of  the  approved  courses  and  approved  institution  of  learning after 
spending  a  minimum  of  two  (2)  years  with  the  corps  from  the  first  day  of 
appointments. Minimum of five (5) years is approved for full-time basis 
d. A  staff  seeking  approval  for  further  studies  shall  complete  from 
TSC/EDU/O1A 

21 
 
e. Career progression training at the FRSC Academy and Training school 
shall   be   accorded  priority,   while   training   with   short   duration   in   any 
recognized professional institution shall be encourage.  
f. Development  staff  after  training  shall  take  cognizance  of the  new 
skill acquired. 
g. Staff to be granted approval for further studies shall not exceed 5% 
of the total staff strength in the corps at any given years and such approval 
shall be subject to availability of fund. 
h. Any staff on course can be re-called by the corps marshal and chief 
Executive, should the need arise. 
i. Staff  who  are  unable  to  complete  any  course  of  study  within  the 
normal  duration  may  apply  to  the  corps  marshal  and  chief  Executive  for 
extension through Training standards and certification Department. 
j. Any  staff  that  has  put  in  34years  in  service  or  attained  59  year  of 
age  should  not  be  qualified  for  a  sponsored  course  of  study  leave  without 
pay. 
k. A marshal shall not be considered for conversion if he did not secure 
approval to go on the course in the first instance. 
l. A staff shall qualify to pursue any of the approved courses if free of 
any disciplinary case that could lead to termination/dismissal. 
5.3 TYPES OF COURSES 
a. Short- Duration courses 
b. Part-time courses 
c. Foreign courses 
d. Technical assistance 
 
a. SHORT DURATION COURSES 
i. These  are  training  programmes  not  exceeding  six  (6)  months  which 
shall  be  handled  by  FRSC  Training  Institutions  (Academy  &  Training 
School). Apart from this, staff may be nominated and sent to Universities/ 
Government institutions offering similar short duration courses such as: 
ii. Centre for Management Development (CMD) 
iii. Civil Service College (CSC) 
iv. National Information and Technology Development Agency (NITDA) 

22 
 
v. Digital Institute 
vi. Nigerian Army School of Supply & Transport 
vii. TV College/Nigeria Film Institute 
viii. Public Service Institute of Nigeria 
ix. Citizenship & Leadership Training Centre. 
 
b. PART-TIME COURSES 
The conditions for part-time courses shall be as follow: 
i. Approval may be given to staff to engage on part-time studies if the 
course is relevant to the commission. 
ii. Staff  proceeding  on  part-time  studies  shall  do  so  completely  at  his 
own expense for courses that will lead to the award of certificate, National 
Diploma (ND), Higher National Diploma (HND) and Bachelors Degree. 
 
c. FOREIGN COURSES 
i. Staff  of  the  rank  of  RC  and  above  shall  be  considered  for  foreign 
courses,  except  where  otherwise  dictated  by  the  needs/demands  of 
the  job  or  where  offers  of  training  from  multilateral  agencies  or 
friendly  donor  countries  specifically request  participants  of  a  lower 
rank. 
ii. It  is  good  to  note  that  staff  selected  for  foreign  courses  shall  be 
entitled  to  full  sponsorship  during  the  period  of  study  according  to 
financial regulations. 
 
5.4 ATTAINABLE QUALIFICATIONS 
Courses undertaken shall lead to the award of the following: 
i. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) 
ii. Masters Degree 
iii. Postgraduate Diploma 
iv. Postgraduate Certificate 
v. Bachelor‟s Degree 
vi. Higher National Diploma 
vii. National Diploma 
viii. Professional Certificate from Institution recognized by law 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
5.5 EDUCATIONAL SPONSORSHIP IN FRSC 
 
TYPES OF SPONSORSHIP 
a. Full Sponsorship 
b. Partial Sponsorship 
c. Study Leave Without Pay 
FULL  SPONSORSHIP: Postgraduate  and  Masters  Degree  beneficiaries  shall 
receive  an  amount  for  tuition,  books  and  project  as  contained  in  the admission 
letter  of  the  institution.  The  cost  of  accommodation  and  transportation  shall  be 
determined on location. 
Specialized and professional courses undertaken at National Institute for Policies 
and  Strategic  Studies  (NIPSS),  National  Defence  College  (NDC),  Armed  Forces 
Command  and  Staff  College  (AFCSC)  and  Administrative  Staff  College  (ASCON), 
shall also receive full sponsorship and monthly allowance as follows: 
i. DCM           –           N100,000  
ii. ACM           --           N90,000  
iii. CC/DCC      –           N70,000    
iv. ACC/CRC    --          N60,000  
v. SRC/RC       --           N50,000  
vi. DRC/ARC   --           N40,000 
Staff on full sponsorship shall also: 
i. Be released from duty 
ii. Be entitled to continuous payment 
iii. Be entitled to promotion during the period of study. 
 This  category  of  staff  shall  maintain  effective  communication  with  management 
through TSC for the period of study.  
 
PARTIAL SPONSORSHIP: Partial  sponsorship  may  be  enjoyed  by  staff  who  are 
to  pursue  higher  degrees  including  PhD  not  exceeding  36  months  for  specialized 
courses.  A maximum of  N500,000  only shall  be  given to  beneficiaries  for  tuition, 
books and projects for PGD and Masters degree programmes while a maximum of 
1,000,000 for Ph.D. 
 
STUDY LEAVE WITHOUT PAY: If the course of study is relevant, approval shall 
be given to staff (Officers and Marshals) whose appointment has been confirmed 
and have served the corps for a minimum of five (5) years and such staff shall do 
so  exclusively  at  their  own  expense.  For  courses  leading  to  award  bachelors 
degree and above, the duration of which shall not be more than 48 months.  

24 
 
6. FRSC STAFF WRITING  
Staff writing is a standardized way of communication.  Even though it is peculiar 
to  every  organization,  it  must  also  meet  the basic  minimum  of  internationally 
accepted standard. A standardized writing method becomes necessary in order to 
communicate logically, concisely, accurately and so on.  
The  Federal  Road  Safety  Corps  has  developed  a  standardized  writing  manual  to 
guide its communication within the organization and outside the Organization. This 
is  aimed  at  reducing the  official  time  in  coping with  extracting  information  from 
diverse writing methods   
6.1 TYPES OF WRITING 
Operational writing: abbreviation can be used here i.e. Part I and II order, signal, 
memo Non-operational writing: others write where use of abbreviation is 
restricted.  
6.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF WRITING  
a. Accuracy 
b. Brevity  
c. Clarity  
d. Relevance  
e. logical  
 
6.3 BASIC RULES AND CONVENTIONS  
a. Parts of document:  
i. Superscript –before text  
ii. Text  
iii. Subscript  
b. Heading- used to logically break lengthy text 
i. Subheading  
ii. Main heading (centrally placed, cap, underlined)  
iii. Group heading –to demarcate paragraph and subparagraph. 
 
c. Annexure are supplementary document that amplify text and are referred 
to at the end of document  
d. Appendix are supplementary document that amplify annexure  
e. Enclosures – is a complete document attached to the presentation 
f. Distribution – is placed immediately after the signature block. This address 
is arranged in the following order.  
i. External action  
ii. External info  
iii. Internal action  
iv. Internal info   

25 
 
g. Signature- initial and name of signatory in block capital  
h. Dating- day, month year- i.e. 9 April 2013 or 9 Apr 13  
i. Document clarification- i.e. Top secrete (Policy), Secrete (Plans) and 
Confidential  
(Technical report), Restricted (Manuals)  
j. Precedence- immediate (urgent), priority (important). 
 
6.4 FRSC CORRESPONDENCE 
 Types of correspondence-   
1. Direct (from HQ to field officer)  
2. Routine (HQ to field commands)  
3. Routine to external organization(HQ to stakeholders)  
4. Formal (HQ to dept. in HQ on a program)  
5. Demi-official (HQ to individual staff)  
All letters take the form earlier shown except internal memo.  
6.5 FILES AND DOCUMENTS  
A file store can present the whole history of one aspect of a subject under 
cover in chronological order of reference.  
 Documents include notes, letters, drawings, carbons or bonus, files photograph, 
slides, etc.  
6.6 FILLING SYSTEM AND SECURITY OF DOCUMENTS  
 File numbers and titles are allocated by the registry from a filing index 
based on a chosen theme. 
 A new file (vol. 2) is opened when original has up to 100 enclosures  
 T„ file is opened to pass document internally  
 If content of a file is transferred to a clear file the back front page of old 
file is attached.  
 Closing of file- an officer completes a file disposal form and places it in the 
file as the top enclosure and the registry takes action by choosing it.  
 Document security- on  ̳need to know„ basis irrespective of rank and 
appointment. This Include security during production and transmission, 
copying and reproduction.  
 Filing system   
 Blocked system: (subject heading i.e. promotion, discipline etc.)  

26 
 
 G, A or Q system consider hierarchy (i.e. HQ, Zone, Sector, Unit) or 
importance.  
 Alphabet system- simply uses A to Z to number the files.    
6.7 STANDARD PAPERS  
 Paper writing is one of staff officers work. It presents, past, current or 
future fact, opinion, argument and recommendation etc.  
 It„s usually consist of superscript, subscript and the body.  
 The body consist of introduction, Aim, Objective, Content, Recommendation 
and or conclusion, Annex,, reference or bibliography  
 Introduction - This gives reason why the paper was written, background, 
underpinning or understanding, scope and purpose. But it should be brief, a 
gist of aim, objective and conclusion.  
 It is to have one aim that simply summarize the essence of the whole paper  
 Discussion- presents the argument in a direct, concise, logical and 
convincing manner. The style varies in writing, it could be very 
argumentative, use of subheading, cause and effect, criteria 
establishment etc.  
 Recommendation and conclusion   
6.8 CONFERENCE, MEETING AND MINUTES 
a. Duty of secretaries- record proceeding i.e manual or electronic  
b. Duties of a chairman include: 
i. planning and convening meeting. 
ii. Meeting control and direction. 
iii. Supervision of production and distribution of accurate record of 
proceeding.  
iv. Vet and operate agenda of meetings  
v. Start meetings  
vi. Introduce members. 
vii. State aim  
viii. Introduce items. 
ix. Appoint and guide discussants. 
x. Summarize discussion. 
xi. Take discussion  
xii. Allocate actions  
 
6.9 BRIEF  
This is a short accurate info posed to subordinate. It saves time and discuss the 
matter properly. It can be oral or written i.e.   
 Brief for ZCO RS2.21  
 Use of Siren  

27 
 
 
6.10 TYPES OF BRIEF 
a. Decision brief- summary of completed document  
b. Information brief- on current problem or situation  
c. Meeting brief- to make superiors familiarize with the agenda  
d. Personality brief- details of visitors and their mission 
e. Visiting brief- question likely to be encountered if a superior is 
travelling  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
7. CRASH INVESTIGATION 
Crash  investigation  is  an  important  element  in  the  entire  incident  management 
process  at  a  crash  scene.  It  is  an  effort  to  determine  how  the  crash  occurred. 
Investigation  is  required  to  document  the  cause  and  description of  traffic 
crashes. 
Information that is collected during a crash investigation which is similar, can be 
used  by  traffic  engineers  to  support  safety  improvement  in  crash  prone  areas.  
The  information  may  also  be  used  by  insurance  companies  to  provide  information 
for litigation purpose. 
After a crash has occurred, law enforcement officers(Police, FRSC and VIO)with 
their  unique  report  form  are  required  to  complete  a  crash  report  form.    The 
purpose of this procedure is to collect information regarding the nature and cause 
of crash,thus the Concept and Conduct of Crash Investigation. 
7.1 WHAT IS ROAD CRASH INVESTIGATION? 
Crash- Collide violently with an obstacle or another vehicle. 
Investigate- Carryout   a   systematic   or   formal   inquiry   into   (an   incident   or 
allegation) so as to establish the truth. (Concise Oxford Dictionary). 
Crash  Investigation can  be  defined  as  a  procedure  in  carrying  out  a  systematic 
inquiry into vehicle collision with an obstacle or another vehicle, so as to establish 
the truth. 
7.2 PURPOSE OF CRASH INVESTIGATION 
Collision Investigation and analysis could be seen variously as: 
a. A scientific effort to collect and interpret results. 
b. A systematic look at nature and extent of collisions and loss. 
c. An enquiry into how and why the collision occurred. 
d. A consideration of what can be done to prevent further similar occurrences. 
e. A planning process to explore action to minimize or eliminate reoccurrence. 
General,  it  is  a  systematic  method  of  inquiry  into  the  facts  and  circumstances 
surrounding traffic collision.  
The purposes of Crash Investigation are: 
a. To prevent a recurrence of crashes from similar causes. 
b. To determine the sequences of events leading to a traffic crash. 
c. To identify the immediate and underlying causes of an RTC. 

29 
 
d. To improve operational and safety procedures. 
e. To defend a position for legal argument 
f. To satisfy insurance requirements 
 
7.3 CRASH INVESTIGATIVE ELEMENTS AND METHODOLOGY 
There is no fixed step-by-step technique for crash investigation. However, having 
no  procedure  at  all  is  the  beginning of  failure.  Often an  investigator  wishes  that 
he could go back and investigate a crash all over again. He may have neglected to 
look into an important matter or forgotten a vital activity. 
Consequently,  a  general  methodology  of  all  that  might  be  done is  indispensable. 
Such a technique could be easily adjusted to meet the prevailing circumstances at 
any of the five stages of the collision investigation. These stages are; 
a. Responding to the scene of a crash. 
b. Arriving at the scene of a crash. 
c. When the emergency is under control. 
d. When urgent Data-Collection is complete. 
e. When work at the scene is finished.  
 
7.4 RESPONDING TO THE SCENE OF A CRASH 
a. Obtain  as  much  information  as  possible  about  the  crash  including  the 
following: 
i. The exact location and time of the crash. 
ii. What is involved and type of crash 
iii. The extent of injury/damage involved. 
iv. Whether the traffic is obstructed/traffic condition.  
v. Whether fire is involved. 
vi. Whether a rescue team have been mobilized. 
b. Based on the information received arrange for any needed help. 
c. Assemble  the  rescue  and  investigation  materials  including  causality  forms 
(RTC  field  report  forms),  statement  forms,  vehicle  examination  forms, 
markers,  measuring  devices,  tape  recorders,  cameras,  GPS  and  writing 
materials. 
d. On  approaching  the scene,  be  alert  for  vehicles  leaving  the  scene  as 
possibly  carrying  witnesses  or  hit  and  run  drivers.  Record  registration 
numbers of any likely vehicles. 
 

30 
 
7.5 ARRIVING AT THE SCENE OF A CRASH 
a. Ensure your safety and that of the scene. 
b. Respond to emergencies including caring for the victims. 
c. Locate  and  separate  the  drivers  of  each  vehicle/witnesses  still  at  the 
scene. 
d. Look for the physical evidence of the crash and have it guarded until it can 
be examined or located by measurements. This includes: 
i. Position of vehicles at final rest 
ii. Position of pedestrians, motorcyclists, bicycle  
iii. riders, ejected occupants (deceased or injured). 
a. Road Scars(scratches, scraps, chips, chops and grooves).  
iv. Debris  including  dislodged  vehicle  parts,  underbody  debris,  vehicle 
liquids, blood, body tissues, personal effects (handbags, hats, glasses etc). 
v. Contact to fixed objects. 
vi. Tyre  marks  such  as  skid  marks,  yaw  marks,  acceleration scuff,  flat 
tyre and imprint. 
. 7.6 WHEN THE EMERGENCY IS UNDER CONTROL 
a. Interview drivers and witnesses applying the following precautions; 
i. Be  tactful,  patient,  specific,  positive,  objective,  open  minded, 
adaptable and employ good communication skill. 
ii. Interview involved persons alone and away from others. 
iii. Gather identification from the person first. 
iv. Allow  the  person  to  tell  his  or  her  version  of  the  events  without 
interruption. 
v. Be  sure  to  ask  the  persons  exactly  where  they  were  (position) 
when crash occurred. 
vi. Pay   close   attention   to   any   signs   or   actions   that   suggests 
confusion, intoxication, injury, illness or impairments. 
vii. Officers  may  also  request  persons  to  provide  a  written  signed 
statement. 
b.  Examine  the  crash  site  including  the  roadway  features  &  the  physical 
evidence on the road and record your observations. 
c. Examine the crashed vehicle(s) noting the following; 
i. Gather Vehicle identification data- Reg.No., Make, Model, Type  
ii. Document Contact and induced damage areas 
iii. Document Major parts detached. 

31 
 
iv. Examine  Tyre  and  wheel  for- flatness,  punches, unseated  rims,  bent 
flange and struck wheels 
v. Examine Lamps/Lamp Switches for - on/off, broken/damage 
vi. Examine Steering Wheel for- free turns or tightness 
vii. Examine Brake Pedal for- free to floor or tightness 
viii. Take the Speedometer Reading 
ix. Check Safety belts used 
x. Check for Air Bag Deployment 
 
d.Takephotographs of the scene, physical evidence and the crash vehicle(s) noting 
the following; 
i. Take  photographs  before  vehicles  are  moved  from  their  final  rest 
positions. 
ii. Take four view sequence photographs of the crash scene showing basic 
landmarks. 
iii. Take general story-telling photographs of the scene. 
iv. Take photographs of the four sides of each vehicle  
v. Take matching damage parts photographs of vehicle 
vi. Take  close  up  or  detailed  photographs  of  specific  road  scars,  tyre 
marks and vehicle damage. 
vii. Fill the crash investigation Forms 
 
e. Mark the collision results. 
i. Use a point to mark small objects such as a human body and debris less 
than 1m across. 
ii. Use  two  points  to  mark  vehicles‟  positions,  straight  tyre  marks  and 
straight grooves greater than 1m in length. 
iii. Use  three  or  more  points  to  mark  large  debris  area,  curved  tyre marks 
and straight tyre marks with angles, crooks and gaps. 
iv.  Assign  different  letters  to  each  object  marked.  For  instance,  if  there 
are 3 tyre marks, label the first A, the second B and the third C. 
v.  use numeric suffixes to denote multiple points for the same object. For 
example, the letter D may be used to identify a debris area with points 
along the perimeter designated D1, D2, D3, D4 etc 
f.    Make a field sketch of the crash scene. 
7.7 POINTS TO NOTE WHILE MAKING A FIELD SKETCH 
a. The sketch should include the result of the crash, roadway features, north 
-arrow,  location,  time  and  date  of  the  crash  as  well  as  the  name  of  the 
sketcher. 

32 
 
b. Begin by drawing the skeleton of the roadway edges. 
c. Place the north-arrow in an out-of-the-way corner of the sketch. 
d. Represent vehicles, persons, tyre marks and other result of the crash with 
the standard symbols. 
e. Use alphanumeric to label the features depicted. 
 
7.8 TYPES OF COLLISION ROAD SCARS 
a. SCRATCHES- are the thin, light and irregular scars made on road pavement 
by  sliding  metal  part(s)  of  vehicles  without  great  pressure.  Scratches  are 
most  useful  to  show  where  a  vehicle  turned  over  on  the  roadway  and  the 
path it followed after the collision. 
b. SCRAPES are  the  broad  and  light  scars  made  on  road  pavement  by  sliding 
metal  part(s)  of  vehicles  without  great  pressure.  Scrapes  often  help  in 
locating the area of maximum engagement 
c. CHIPS are small deep scars where pavement materials have been dug out by 
strong  metal  parts  such  as  frames,  transmission  housing,  and  control  arms 
which  have  been  forced  down  on  the  road. Chips  are  nearly  always  made 
during  maximum  engagement  and  mark  a  spot  on  the  road  where  the 
corresponding part of the vehicle was when maximum engagement occurred. 
d. CHOPS are  broad,  shallow  scars  where  pavement  materials  have  been  dug 
out by strong metal parts such as frames, transmission housing, and control 
arms which have been forced down on the road. Chops are made by vehicle 
frames and sometimes wheel rims during maximum engagement. 
e. GROOVES are  long  narrow  scars  where  pavement  materials  have  been  dug 
out by strong metal parts such as projecting nuts, or stud and sometimes by 
the drive shaft or some other parts dragging on the road. Grooves show the 
pathway the vehicle followed after collision. 
7.9 COLLISION RECONSTRUCTION 
With the conclusion of data gathering from the scene of a collusion and technical 
follow-up  investigation,  collision  reconstruction  is  performed  in  order  to  look  for 
contributing and root causes of the collision. 
Collision  reconstruction  is  the  process  of  using physics  to  determine  the relative 
positions of vehicles at different times during the collision sequence.Information 
such as the pre-and post-impact direction of travel, the length of the pre-impact 
skid marks, the pre-impact speed of the vehicle, the post-impact distances moved, 
the friction values for the various surfaces the vehicles travelled over, the point 
of impact (POI), the principal direction of force (the impact angles or thrust) and 

33 
 
the weights of the vehicles are all inputs to the equations used in reconstructing a 
collision.Understanding  how  vehicles  behave  in  collisions  is  a  therefore  a  very 
importance step in collision reconstruction. 
7.10 HOW VEHICLES BEHAVE IN COLLISION 
Study  of  vehicle  movements  in  collision  is  often  the  key  to  discovering  where  on 
the  road  an  impact  took  place  and  what  the  driver  actions  involved.  Hence, 
deciding how vehicles came together and finally separated in a collision is the first 
step  in  thinking  about  what  happened  in  a  collision.  It  is  always  a  matter  that 
requires very careful understanding of the following: 
a. Basic sequence of collision 
b. Contact damage area and deformation 
c. Principal direction of force 
d. Force and rotation. 
7.11 BASIC SEQUENCE OF COLLISION 
The  basic  sequence  of  collision  also  known  as  elements  of  a collision  are  made  of 
three events namely; 
a. First contact 
b. Maximum engagement 
c. Separation 
 First contact: this is the beginning of a collision. At that instant, force 
begins to develop between the objects. 
 Maximum  engagement: this  is  the  point  at  which  the  force  between 
objects in collision is greatest. It is the point of maximum penetration or 
collapse between objects in collision. 
 Separation: this  is  the  point  at  which  the  force  between  objects  in 
collision returns to zero. At this instant virtually all the deformation at 
maximum engagement remains as vehicle damage. 
7.12 CONTACT AREA OF DAMAGE 
Contact  damage  is  the  damage  to  any  part  of  a  motor  vehicle  by  direct  contact 
with  some  object  which  is  not part  of  the  vehicle. Contact  damage  area  is 
characterized by: 
a. Closely compacted crumpled body parts 
b. Scratches in the surface of the metal 
c. Smears of paint due to friction heat  

34 
 
d. Ragged tears in sheet metal 
e. Punctures in sheet metal, fiberglass panels, tyres, plastic lenses & glass.  
f. The  matching  of  contact  damage  parts  of  two  vehicles  often  shows  how 
they came together in collision. 
7.13 PRINCIPAL DIRECTION OF FORCE 
a. The  PDOF  also  called  thrust  is  the  summation  of  these  forces  over  the 
contact duration expressed as a vector. 
b. During  an  impact,  there  are  forces  that  occur  between  vehicles  and  these 
vary in position and time. 
c. PDOF  is  indicated  by  contact damage  and  crush resulting from the  impact. 
It is usually at the mid of the damage area. 
d. PDOF  is  determined  by  the  direction  that  specific  parts  were  moved  in 
impact. 
There are two ways to describe PDOF name: 
a. Degrees from the lengthwise axis of the vehicle 
b. Hour numbers from a clock face with 12 „O clock at the front and its centre 
at the application point. 
7.14 COLLISION INVESTIGATION 
A  traffic  collision  investigation  is  only  complete  when  a  report  is  prepared  and 
submitted  to  the  appropriate  authorities.Road  Collision  Investigation  Report 
(RCIR)  should  include  cause  analysis  to  arrive  at  the  conclusions  on  how  collision 
happened.Report  should  be  rendered  in  both  soft  and  hard  copies.Report  should 
be sent two days after the conclusion of the investigation through approved e-mail 
addresses  to Corps Safety  Engineering, RSHQ.The  hard  copy  should  be  sent 
through the normal approved channel of communication to Corps Marshal. 
7.15 CRASH INVESTIGATION REPORT FORMAT 
a. Cover page 
i. Time & date 
ii. Command 
iii. Location 
iv. Investigator 
v. vehicle(s) & driver(s) 
vi. Abstract 
vii. No of people involved 
viii. No injured 
ix. No killed 
x. Causes 

35 
 
xi. Date of investigation 
b. General information 
c. Crash scene 
d. Environmental factors 
e. Vehicle involved and occupants 
f. Seatbelt availability and use 
g. Tyre examination 
h. Lamb examination 
i. Vehicle damage analysis 
j. At-scene physical evidence 
k. Accident scenario 
l. Measurement 
i. General scene measurement 
ii. Non-fixed objects  
iii. Evidence from the road 
iv. Vehicle dimensions 
m. Summary & conclusion 
n. Recommendations 
o. Attachments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
8. ISO 9001:2015 QMS 
8.1 The Concept of ISO 9001:2015 QMS 
FRSC as a best example of lead agency in Road Traffic Administration and Safety 
Management in Africa has developed its initiatives towards achieving excellence in 
service delivery based on a 3-pronged approach of People, Process and Technology. 
The Concept of „Process‟ of the tripod was pursued through the adoption of ISO 
9001  (Quality  Management  System)  in  February  2008.  This  is  one  of  the  various 
standards of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 
The  Corps  has  been  using  the  QMS  to  further  the  Corps‟ commitment  to 
continually improve its effectiveness in serving the needs of Nigerians in the area 
of  road  safety.  It  has  helped  the  Corps  become  more  effective  and  maintain 
recognition by its customers. 
This   is   a   milestone   that   reflects   FRSC   true   disposition   as   a   determined 
organization  that  is  committed  to  attaining  excellence  in  all  aspects  of  its 
operations and service delivery. 
QMS is one of the best known international Standards code-named ISO 9001 by 
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 
ISO is derived from the Greek word “ISOS” which means „equal‟. It Stands  for 
International  Organization  for  Standardization. It  was  established  in  1947  with 
Headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. 
Each  country  is  represented  in  ISO  by  the  standards  body  of  such  country. 
Therefore,  ISO  is  represented  in  Nigeria  by  Standards  Organization  of  Nigeria 
(SON). 
8.2 Pre-QMS era in FRSC 
In  2007,  FRSC,  under  the  leadership  of  the  then  Corps  Marshal  and  Chief 
Executive, Osita Chidoka took stock of the past, evaluated the present with a view 
to  charting  a  new  direction  and  more  purposeful  future  for  the  Corps.  This 
necessitated  the  introduction  of  QMS  in  the  Corps  and  consequently  spurred 
everybody  in  the  Corps  to  action  in  order  to  make  the  Corps  a  world  class 
organization. 
The Corps began its journey into QMS world in 2008. Before then, FRSC activities 
were  characterized  by  myriads  of  administrative  lapses  ranging  from  improper 
documentation, poor record keeping and overlapping job functions. 
Lack of processes and procedures, increasing customer complaints, internal waste 
and damages, staff poor attitude to work, frequent breakdown of facilities, poor 
performance of staff, and other vices. Standard took the back seat as at then. 
 
 

37 
 
8.3Journey to ISO Certification 
There  are  about  22,000  ISO  Standards  to  date  worldwide,  covering  various 
subjects/industries.  But  ISO  9001  is  the  most  popular  and  acceptable  .  To 
address  the  above  challenges  bedeviling  the  Corps,  QMS  was  used  to  seek 
improvement in line with global best practices, through: Involvement of the people 
- Everybody in the Corps was involved from the beginning. 
In 2009, the entire FRSC Top Management team was trained on ISO 9000:2000. 
Followed by the training of 80 Officers as Internal System Auditors. 68 qualified 
as Internal System Auditors with 60 proceeding to Lead Auditors. 
45 eventually became Lead Auditors. A total of 452 processes were identified in 
the  Corps  and  documented  in  the  firstever  FRSC  Quality  Manual  developed 
alongside the Quality Policy. In the course of implementation, the Corps procured 
the services of a consulting firm that assisted with the Gap Analysis of the Corps. 
In  order  to  have  direct  supervision,  Quality  Management  System  Unit  was 
established in the office of the Corps Marshal and Chief Executive. 
Awareness programmes on how to achieve quality in the Corps‟ business as well as 
the  need  for  commitment  of  staff  to  organizational  goals  took  place  in  all  FRSC 
formations. 
Trained Internal System Auditors were used to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
system  through  internal  system  audits.  Mock  Audit  of  departments  and  Corps 
Offices  at  the  HQs  were  conducted.  ISO  lectures  were  featured  in  most  FRSC 
trainings and workshops. 
The External System Auditors from the Standards Organization of Nigeria (SON) 
were  used  to  also  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  the  system  through  system 
audits. Internal efficiency was entrenched by establishing guidelines through the 
FRSC Quality Manual for everyone to follow easily. 
8.4 What does ISO 9001:2015 cover? 
a. Based on PLAN-DO-CHECK-ACT methodology. 
b. Provide a process-oriented approach. 
c. Risk-based thinking 
8.5 Benefits of ISO 9001:2015? 
ISO 9001:2015 helps organisation to: 
a. Ensure their customers consistently receive high quality products and 
services. 
b. Create satisfied customers, Management and employees. 
c. Organise and improve the efficiency of processes Continually improve on its 
d. Credibility by proving to customers that its products and services meet 
expectation. 

38 
 
e. ISO 9001 is positive for organisational image as it shows that you comply 
with internationally recognised quality standard. 
8.6 The Role of Staff in the implementation of ISO 9001 
a. Know your job, do it well and on time. 
b. Be committed, responsible and remain accountable. 
c. Ensure your Working tools are available and well maintained. 
d. Be a team player. 
e. Maintain records/Evidence of assigned jobs. 
f. Suggest better ways of improving the system. 
g. Be ready for ISO 9001 System Audit of your work at any time. 
h. Be audit friendly and co-operate with System Auditors. 
i. Support the ISO 9001 implementation in your office. 
j. Remember   you   are   very   important;   we   cannot   achieve   ISO   9001 
certification without your positive contributions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
8. FRSC REGULATIONS ON DISCIPLINE, 2018 
8.1 Offences Relating To Duty 
a. AWOL - Major Entry and forfeiture of Salary for the number of days. 
b. Desertion - Dismissal  
c.  Dereliction of duty – Loss of seniority 
d.  Lateness – minor entry or reprimand. 
e.  Malingering -Major Entry and forfeiture of Salary for the number of days. 
f.  Acts of Negligence – Loss of seniority 
8.2 Offences Relating To Information 
a. unauthorized disclosure of Information-Termination 
b. facture to make report - Loss of seniority  
c.  Presentation of false document or certificate – Termination 
d. Unauthorised educational qualification - Loss of seniority. 
e. Concealment of higher qualification on Appointment- Loss of seniority. 
8.3 Offences  Relating  to  Borrowing,  Lending  Debts,  Illegal  Employment, 
Petitions and Improper Dressing 
a. Borrowing from junior staff–Reduction in rank. 
b. Failure to pay debt – Reduction in Rank 
c. Carrying on any other paid employment – Termination 
d. Influenced promotion – Major Entry. 
e. Improper dressing - Major Entry. 
f. Anonymous petition – Termination 
8.4 Offences Relating to Corruption, Gross Misconduct and Indiscipline 
a. Obstructing Marshals on Duty –Loss of seniority. 
b. Incivility to member of the public - Loss of seniority. 
c. Maltreatment and false complaint – Major Entry. 
d. Bribe – Termination of Appointment. 
e. Failure to make entry after patrol - Reduction in rank. 
f. False Allegation - Termination of Appointment 
g. Disobedience to Standing/particular order –Major Entry. 
h. Failure to pay compliment - Magic Entry. 
i. Improper channel of correspondence – Reduction in Rank. 
j. Drinking or smoking while on duty – Reduction in Rank. 
k. Forgery - Termination of Appointment 
l. Assault/civic conduct- Reduction in Rank. 
m. Manslaughter/murder- (criminality)  handed  over  to  police,  placed  on  half 
salary and upon conviction dismissed from service. 
n. Mutiny- dismissal from service. 
o. Rape – dismissal from service. 
p. Rioting – Dismissal from service. 
q. Scandalous behaviour- termination of appointment. 
r. Rudeness to superior- loss of seniority. 

40 
 
s. Stealing or looting- dismissal from service. 
t. Treason- handed  over  to  police,  placed  on  half  salary  and  dismissal  from 
service upon conviction. 
8.5 Offences relating property 
a. Damage  to  property: Replacement  of  the  property  damaged  within  3 
months. 
b. Driving  and  damaging  of  Corps  vehicle  by  non-commissioned  driver  or 
offender‟s vehicle –Payment  of  cost  of repairs  or  replacement  of  vehicle 
within three (3) months or have appointment termination. 
8.6 Offences relating information processing 
a. Unauthorised production of driver licence- Termination of appointment. 
b. Unauthorised production of number plate- Termination of appointment. 
c. Duty room offences- Reduction in rank. 
 
8.7 Other offences 
a. failure to testify before FDP- Reduction in rank 
b. False information to FDP- Reduction in rank 
c. Wilfully insults/assaults in FDP- Reduction in rank 
d. Continuous misconduct- Termination of appointment. 
 
8.8 Procedure for FDP 
An  FDP  may  be  convened  by  the  appropriate  Authorizing  Officers  to  investigate 
Officers from the rank of ACC to DCM for all misconducts under the Regulations, 
and  also  for  members  of  the  Corps  from  the  rank of  RMAIII  to  CRC  for 
misconducts  that  may  attract  punishment  not  lower  than  loss  of  seniority  on 
conviction. See Regulation 61. 
Who can convene an FDP? 
FDP may be convened by any of the following appropriate Disciplinary Authorities: 
a. The Chairman of the Commission 
b. The Corps Marshal 
c. Heads of Department (HODs) 
d. Corps Officers (COS)  
e. Heads of Special Unit 
f. Zonal Commanding Officers (ZCO) 
g. Sector Commanders (SC) 
h. Unit Commanders (UC). See Regulation 58. 
The Composition of FDP and Qualifications for Membership 
FRSC Disciplinary Panel shall compose of the following: 

41 
 
a.  A Chairman, who shall not be below the rank of CRC 
b.  Three other members one of whom shall be a Legal Officer of the Command 
where  the  misconduct  is  committed  or  a  Legal  Officer  in  Legal  Office  in  RSHQ; 
and 
c. A Secretary who is also a member. 
It should be noted that where a Marshal is being investigated, one of themembers 
should  be  a  Marshal  not  below  the  rank  of  Senior  Marshal  Inspector  (SMI).  See 
Regulation 59(1). 
A  Marshal should  not  be  a  member  of  an  FDP  set  up  to  investigate  anOfficer 
except where the Officer is jointly investigated with a Marshal. 
The Chairman investigating an Officer must be senior in rank to the defaulter and 
must not be below the rank of a Chief Route Commander (CRC). 
No member of the Corps shall be appointed to serve in the FRSC Disciplinary Panel 
except he is subject to the Corps Regulations and has been in the service of the 
Commission for a period of not less than Six (6) months. See Regulation 60. 
If a member of the Corps is a complainant at any proceedings, he should not be a 
member of the Panel investigating the defaulter. 
Aperson to be called as a witness should not also be a member of Panel. 
FDP Investigation Procedure 
Investigation in an FDP is conducted in the following manner: 
a.  A defaulter must be informed of the allegation(s) against him in writing and 
given  at  least  seventy-two  (72)  hours  to  prepare  his  defence.  Note  that  once  all 
disciplinary matters are published in PART ONE ORDER, they are deemed to have 
been officially communicated to all members of the Corps and the defaulter once 
published. 
b.  The  defaulter  shall  be  marched  in,  before  an  FDP  without  head  dress  and 
belt by the Provost. 
c.  The  names  of  members  of  the  FDP  should  be read  to  the  hearing  of  the 
defaulter before the investigation begins. 
d.  The  defaulter  is  entitled  to  object  to  the  membership  of  the  Panel 
withgood reason. 
e.  Oath shall be taken by the members of the Panel. 

42 
 
f.  The  allegation(s)  are  to  be  read  to  the  hearing  of  the  defaulter  before 
commencement of investigation. 
g.  Plea shall be taken by the defaulter. It has to be guilty or not guilty.Thereis 
nothing like guilty with reason. It simply means not guilty. 
h.  Both sides call witness (es) (if any) and they must be placed on oath. 
i.  There  are  examination-in-chief,  cross  examination  and  re-examination  by 
witnesses on both sides. 
j. Exhibits  are  to  be  tendered,  if  any,  in  the  form  of  documents  or  any 
otherthing by both sides (if any). 
k.  Investigations  should  be  properly  recorded  in  register(s)  or  electronic 
record to be maintained by AHR, RSHQ and field Commands. 
l. The  panel  may  after  hearing  evidence  dismiss  the  allegation  or  call  onthe 
defaulter to state his defence. 
m.  Also  upon  conclusion,  the  Panel may  record  a  finding  of  not  guilty  but  if  it 
considers the allegation proven it shall record a finding of guilty. A member of the 
Corps  can  only  be  punished  once  it  is  proven  that  he  has  committed  misconduct 
contrary to the Regulations. 
n.  Note that the Panel can recommend a lighter punishment if the misconduct 
established is less than the misconduct being alleged. See Regulation 59(3). 
o. Punishment (s) recommended in respect of misconduct (s) take effect from 
the  date  the  punishment  is  approved  by  the  Management  or  the  appropriate 
authority. See Regulation 62. 
p.  Copies  of  disciplinary  proceedings  including  all  exhibits  (if  any)  are  be 
forwarded to Corps Marshal 
q.  Any  defaulter  who  is  dissatisfied  with  the  decision  of  an  appropriate 
authority shall have right of appeal to the Commission or to Corps Marshal in the 
absence  of  the  Commission.  The  appeal  shall  be  forwarded  to  the  Commission 
through the approved channel of communication but an advanced copy may be sent 
to  the  Commission  or  Corps  Marshal  within  two  weeks.  See  Schedule  3  of  the 
Regulations. 
 
 

43 
 
8.9 Procedure for Summary Proceeding Disciplinary Panel (SPDP) 
This aspect of investigation is conducted in a summary manner. When a report or 
allegation  has  been  made  orally  or  in  writing  to  the appropriate  authority,  the 
appropriate  authority  shall  if  convinced  that  a  prima  facie  case  has  been 
established, direct that the Officer or Marshal against whom the report is made 
appears before him and two others and state the allegation to  the defaulter and 
request him to make his defence immediately. 
A Marshal not below the rank of Senior Marshal Inspector is to be one of the two 
others where the defaulter is a Marshal. 
If    the    defence    put    up    by    the    defaulter    is    not    satisfactory,    the 
appropriatepunishment shall be recommended to the appropriate authority. 
The  summary  proceeding  shall  be  recorded  verbatim  in  a  Summary  Proceeding 
Register. 
Note  that  for  all  members  of  the  Corps  where  the  punishment  is  dismissal, 
termination, reduction in rank or loss of seniority, investigation shall  be by FRSC 
Disciplinary   Panel   which   shall   make   appropriate   recommendations   to   the 
appropriate  authority.  Also note that  ACC  and  above  do  not  face  Summary 
Proceeding for any misconduct committed by them. See Regulations 55 to 58. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

44 
 
9. DATA COLLECTION  
The  acquisition  of  knowledge  on  its  own  starts  with  the  acquisition  of  data.  All 
important  decisions  in  life  are  based  on  the  information  collected  on  a  subject 
matter. The quality of decisions taken is a function of the adequacy and relevance 
of  the  information  at  our  disposal.  It  is  therefore  important  to  know  that  at  its 
primary  stage,  data  is  regarded  as  raw  i.e  it  makes  little  or  no  meaning.  It 
onlymakes complete meaning when it has been processed. 
Consequently, the collection  of  data  in  Road  Safety  does  not  stop  at  that.  As  a 
matter  of  fact, collected  data  undergoes  analysis  which  gives/makes  it  have 
meaning.  The  word  data  means  information  but  is  often  regarded  as  raw  in  its 
unprocessed  stage.  For  an  organization  like  Road  Safety,  every  data  it  collects 
undergoes analysis and interpretation before it is brought out as a veritable tool 
and utilized in the achievement of the goals of the Corps where applicable.  
Definition of Data 
Data is a collection of facts, such as numbers or measurements and the word data 
means information. Strictly speaking, the word ―data is in the plural (the singular 
form is ―datum). However, the word is often used as if it is a singular noun. So, 
we  commonly  say  "the data  is  available"  rather  than  the  more  correct  way  "the 
data are available".  
Classification Of Data 
Data  classification  is  the  categorization  of  data  for  its  most  effective  and 
efficient use. It can be classified as follows:  
1. According to Nature 
a. Quantitative   data:   This   is   information   obtained   from   numeral 
variables e.g. number of officers and marshals in a command, age, bills etc.  
b. Qualitative data: This is a categorical measurement expressed not in 
terms  of  numbers,  but  rather  by  means  of  a  natural  language  description 
such  as  names,  characteristics  and  alpha-numeric  (  e.g.  vehicle  plate 
number),  gender  (male  or  female),  religion  (Christian  or  Muslim),  casualty 
details (injured or killed) etc.   
2. According to Source 
a. Primary data: This is information collected on first hand.  
b. Secondary data: This is second hand informatione.g. published data  
 

45 
 
3. According to Measurement 
a. Discrete  data:  These  are  numerical  observations  obtained  as  whole 
numbers e.g. traffic count data, age etc.  
b. Continuous data: These are data that can take any value and they are 
measured e.g. height, length etc.  
4. According to Arrangement 
a. Ungrouped data: This is a raw data with no specific arrangement e.g. 
the   final   grades   of   12   officers   in   FRSC   Academy   at   the   last 
officers„refreshers   training   course.   83,   80,   78,   86, 
76,82,78,83,84,90,96,90.  
b. Grouped data: This is an organized set of data that is arranged which 
involves two or more groups. 
Example 
GRADES   FREQUENCY( NUMBER OF OFFICERS)  
75-79  3 
80-84  5 
85-89  1 
90-94  2 
95-99  1 
TOTAL  12 
 
Data Collection  
Data  collection  is  any  process  of  preparing  and  collecting  data.  Inaccurate  data 
collection can impact the results of a study and ultimately lead to invalidresults.   
The purpose of data collection is:  
a. To obtain information to keep as records.  
b. To make decisions about important issues, or  
c. To pass information on to others. 
Methods of Data Collection  

46 
 
a. Direct  observation: Data  is  collected  by  observing  and  it  is  the  simplest 
way of collecting data. Example: We want to know how many cars pass by a 
certain point on a road in a 10-minute interval. Simply stand on the road and 
count the cars that pass by in that interval. 
b. Questionnaire: This is an instrument consisting of a series of questions for 
the purpose of gathering information from respondents.  
c. Interview: Data  can  be  collected  through  face-2-face,  telephone  and  the 
internet.  
d. Registration: Data can be collected through registration e.g. births, deaths, 
vehicle registration, population census etc. 
e. Published data: Secondary data can be collected from Bureau of Statistics 
(BOS), Research Institutes, libraries, Federal Road Safety Corps etc.  
Factors influencing the Collection of Data  
The choice of method of data collection is influenced by the following:  
a. Data collection strategy  
b. Type of variable (discrete/continuous)  
c. Accuracy required  
d. Collection point  
e. Skill of the enumerator  
f. Source of data ( primary/secondary) 
Source and Utilization of Data in FRSC 
Data from Road Traffic Crash (RTC) is collected through the following ways:  
i. Scene of the crash 
ii. Hospital information 
iii. Police information  
iv. Eye witness account 
 
Details  of  crash  such  as the  route,  vehicle  type,  vehicle  registration  number, 
number of passengers, cause of crash, casualty details (no of persons killed and no 
of  persons  injured),  and  gender  of  accident  victims  are  recorded  inside  the 
accident report book found in various commands. With these data, crashes can be 
analyzed and proper decisions will be taken to forestall further occurrence. 
Traffic count data: 
Data of different categories of vehicle are collected and analysed which helps to 
effectively plan and monitor vehicular density along a particular road. 
Road traffic offence data 
 

47 
 
These data are collected during patrol and are recorded daily in the offenders‟ 
registers which are found in the duty offices of all commands. 
 
10. FRSC DRESS CODE 
The  "FRSC  Dress  Codes"  is  a standard  of  dress  policy  for  the  Corps'  uniform 
variations. It is used to communicate to all staff what the Corps considers to be 
the appropriate work attire for each day, operation, cadre and specialization. 
10.1 Dress Code and description 
No. 1 (One) Dress (Ceremonial Dress) 
Worn on ceremonial occasions such as: 
 National Parade. 
 Passing-out Parade. 
 Ceremonial Wedding. 
 Remembrance Day Parade. 
 National Honours Award Ceremonies. 
 Pullout parade (for retiring officers). 
Features 
 Peak Cap with appropriate cap badge 
 Gold waist band with sword carrier (ACM- CM) 
 Red waist band with sword carrier (ARC-CC) 
 White belt and anklet for marshals 
 White long sleeve shirt 
 Black tie 
 Sword (as appropriate) 
 A pair of white hand gloves 
 Black trousers with gold stripe (ACM-CM) 
 Black trousers with red stripe (ARC-CC) 
 ACC and above to use appropriate gorget (red neck) 
 Ceremonial rank 
 Name tag, Lanyard as appropriate  
 Black laced shoes and Black socks without design 
 
Service Dress/No. 2 (Two) Dress 
 Has the same top with No. One dress while the trouser is plain. 
 Is  worn  to  the  church  or  mosque  for  Official  function,  lectures/seminars, 
graduation and for friend‟s occasion or as requested by the authority. 
Features 

48 
 
 Has the same top as Ceremonial Dress, but; 
 No waist band 
 No sword 
 The trouser has no red or golden band or stripe 
 Service rank 
 ACC and above to use appropriate garget 
Mess Kit/No. 3 (Three) Dress 
Worn  for  regimental  dinner  as  organized  in  the  Officers‟  Mess    or  assigned 
location E.g: 
 Anniversary Regimental Dinner 
 Sendoff for Senior Retired Officer  
 End of course dinner at the Training Institutions 
 Invitation for regimental function by Sister organizations 
Features 
 White jacket with blue lapels 
 Golden stripe on black trousers (ACM – CM) 
 Blue stripe on black trousers (ARC-CC) 
 Ceremonial rank 
 White long sleeve shirt 
 Black bow tie 
 Gold camoUr band on shirt (ACM-CM) 
 Blue camour band on shirt (ARC-CC) 
 No head dress 
 Name tag (pin type) 
 Black socks (without design) 
 Black laced shoes 
No. 4 Dress (WORK OUT DRESS) 
 Jacket and trouser for office work 
 Worn on Wednesdays to Fridays 
 Must not be worn for patrol duties 
Features 
 White round neck inner vest 
 Maroon or white beret with appropriate cap badge 
 ACC and above to use appropriate gorget 
 General duty rank 
 Name tag 
 Lanyard as appropriate 

49 
 
 Black socks (without design) 
 Black laced shoes 
No. 5 (Five) Dress: 
Worn for office duties 
 5a: ARC- CM (worn on Mondays and Tuesdays) 
Not to be worn with skirt. 
 5b: Marshals 
Features for No. 5a 
 Maroon short sleeve beige collared shirt (sleeves must not be rolled up) 
tucked-in on black trousers   
 White round neck inner vest 
 Beige epaulette 
 Maroon general duty rank 
 Service belt (as appropriate) 
 Name tag 
 Lanyard (as appropriate) 
 Black socks (without design) 
 Black laced shoes or boots 
Features for No. 5b 
 Beige  short  sleeve  shirt  (sleeves  must  not  be  rolled  up)  tucked-in  on 
black trousers  
 White round neck inner vest 
 General duty rank 
 Service belt (as appropriate) 
 Name tag as appropriate 
 Lanyard as appropriate 
 Black socks (without design) 
 Black laced shoes or boots 
No. 6 (Six) Dress 
 Combat/fatigue dress 
 For patrol operations, field work, special assignments  and training only 
 Sleeves must not be rolled up 
 With combat boot only 
Features 
 White round neck inner vest 
 Either long or short sleeve khaki shirt tucked-in on black khaki trouser  

50 
 
 Patrol hat (jungle hat) 
 Two (2) patched side pockets and 2 patched back pockets on trousers 
 General duty rank 
 Service belt (as appropriate) 
 Name tag as appropriate 
10.2 OTHERS 
Pull Over 
 Knitted maroon jumper  
 Worn on top of Dress  5 and 6 
 Not to be worn alone 
Features 
 Maroon colour 
 V- neck (for Officers) 
 Round neck (for Marshals) 
 Must have provision to hang appropriate rank 
 Must be worn with appropriate General duty rank 
 Name tag as appropriate 
 FRSC logo on the left side of the chest 
Maternity Dress 
It  is  a  maternity  gown  worn  during  pregnancy.  Approval  must  be  given  by  the 
commanding Officer/HOD for a staff to wear it. 
Features 
 Beige colour short gown just above the knee 
 Can be worn with black trousers or skirt with beret 
 White round neck inner vest 
 Rank badge 
 Lanyard, name tag   and service shoes with black socks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51 
 
 
 
11. PARADE AND DRILLS 
Parades are aimed at showcasing the level of discipline, expertise and strength of 
the  nation,  command  or  unit.  In  simple  words,  parades  can  be  described  as  the 
uniform  and  orderly  display  of  men  and  materials.  Parade  is  divided  into  two: 
Routine and Ceremonial parades. 
1. Routine  Parade: These  are  parades  that  are  carried  out  almost  on  daily 
basis.  This  type  of  parade  is  usually  called  to  either  pass  information  or  for 
inspection purposes. The following are examples of routine parades. 
a. Reveille: This is the first bugle call sounded in the early hours of the 
morning at exactly 0600 hours. It is meant to signify the commencement of 
the day's activities during this period; the National flag will be hoisted. 
b. Retreat: Retreat is sounded at sunset to signify the end of the day's 
activities  i.e.  lowering  the  national  flag  and  to  notify  sentries  to  start 
challenging intruders until sunrise. 
c. Tattoo:  Tattoo  is  an  outdoor  show  with  the  use  of  bugle  at  night  to 
check  men  on  daily  basis  after  the  day's  work.  This  is  to  ensure  that  all 
personnel are back and complete in the barracks. 
d. Quarter   Guard:   Quarter   Guard   are   mounted   to   showcase   the 
discipline, alertness and readiness of the command. 
e. Change  Of  Quarter-Guards:  Change  of  Quarter  Guard  parade  is 
mounted  weekly  in  a  command  to  signify  the  end  of  duty  for  a  Quarter 
Guard. 
f. RSM  Parade:  RSM  parade  is  more  or  less  a  rehearsal  for  the 
Commanding Officer parades. 
g. Commanding  Officer's  Parade:  Commanding  officer's  parade  is  held 
at RSHQ, Zones, Sectors and Unit Command levels. In FRSC it is referred 
to as muster parade. 
2. Ceremonial  Parades:  Ceremonial  parades  are  parades  conducted  to  mark 
important ceremonies. In ceremonial parades people are invited within and outside 
the  commission  to  witness  it.  It is  usually inspected  and  reviewed  by a Reviewing 
Officer  who  is  often  selected  from  military,  Para-military  or  a  highly  placed 
Civilian.  In  ceremonial  parades,  officers  and  Marshals  are  expected  to  dress  in 
their number one (1) uniform, otherwise known as ceremonial uniform. 
11.1 Types of ceremonial parade 

52 
 
Ceremonial  parade  pattern  varies  in  view  of  the  specific  occasion  it  is  organized 
for. The following are the types of ceremonial parades:  
a. Passing out parade.  
Passing  out  Parade  is  conducted  in  training  institutions  to  mark  the  end  of 
training  for  a  set of  cadets  or  men  respectively.  It  involves  the  cadets  and 
marshals  marching  pass  and  taking  their  oath  of  commission  or  attestation  as 
the case may be. 
b. Independence/ Anniversary parade.  
The  Independence  Day  parade  is  to  commemorate  the  National  independence 
anniversary day which is held on the 1st October yearly. FRSC do participate in 
this    parade    in    conjunction    with    other    military    and    paramilitary 
organizations.The composition, timing and order of parade are same as that of 
Passing  out  Parade  just  with  more  Guards  due  to  availability  of  officers.  But 
the parade is always commanded by a military officer where there is a military 
formation  otherwise  will  be  commanded  by  a  police  officer  especially  at  the 
state level where there is no military formation.  
 
c. Wedding Ceremonies.  
It is customary in regimented organizations for a parade to be organized for a 
staff  (both  Officers  and  Marshals)  that  is  wedding.  Specifically,  swords  are 
crossed  for  commissioned  Officers.  The  least  numerical  strength  of  sword 
party members is twelve (12) who formed in file, but still more officers could 
participate   based   on   their   availability.   However,   Officers   still   adorn 
themselves  with  swords  only  on  ceremonial  occasion  when  needs  arise.  This 
occasion  is  carried  either  at  Church,  Mosque,  and  Court  Registry  or  at  the 
reception  ground.  The  sword  is  presented  to  the  celebrant  at  the  reception 
ground for the cutting of the cake. This is done on behalf of the President C-
in-C  as  a  symbol  to  commemorate  the  wedding  and  for  the  protection  of  the 
wife. The presentation of the sword should be done by an officer equal in rank 
and  seniority  or  subordinate  to  the  Officer  wedding.  Note  that  sword  is  not 
crossed for Marshals.  
 
d. Pulling out parade.  
Pulling out parade is also known as farewell parade and it is held at the instance 
of  retiring  senior  Officers  who  have  served  the  nation  meritoriously.  These 
classes of senior Officers are pulled out as a sign of respect and final farewell 
from the service. This is done immediately after the farewell parade.  
 
e. Burial/funeral parade.  
Funeral  parade  is  organized  in  honour  of  the  deceased  serving  personnel.  All 
ranks  are  to  wear  uniform.  The  national  flag  and  FRSC  flag  will  be  over  the 
coffin  and  prior  to  interment will  be  folded  in  triangular shape and  presented 
to  the  chief mourner  who  will  in  turn  present  it  to  the  next  of  kin.  The  head 

53 
 
dress, belt, sword and boots of the deceased should be placed on the coffin in 
addition  to  wreaths.  The  burial  party  will  consist  of  an  Officer,  senior  non- 
commission  officer  or  Non-commission  officer  in  charge  and  six  to  eight 
bearers  depending  upon  circumstances.  The  rank  of  the  bearers  will  depend 
upon  the  rank  of  the  deceased.  Where  these  ranks  are  not  available,  junior 
ranks next to the rank of deceased may be used. All ranks passing a military or 
paramilitary  funeral  will  salute  the  bier.  Burial  party  may  consist  of  6-8 
persons to arrive at the mortuary.  
 
f. Handing and Taking Over Parade. 
This is otherwise known as vesting day parade which is conducted to mark the 
end   of   leadership   of   a   commanding   Officer   in   a   command   and   the 
commencement of a new one. For vesting day parade, a parade of not less than 
two guards forms up at the parade ground.  
11.2 TYPES OF DRILLS  
1. Foot drills: Foot drills are individual and collective drill carried out at a halt 
or onthe march without the use of arms or swords. It is the foundation of 
all drills foot drills are to be practiced at platoon and company levels. 
2. Squad drills: Squad drills are carried out on the move in quick or slow time 
The squad has two prescribed formations, lines and columns either in two's 
or  three's.  The  movements  of  troops  in  these  formations  forms  the  basis 
of  all  parades  and  ceremonial  drills  Squad  drills  provide  the  rudiments  for 
team work and it is always rehearsed at platoon and company levels. 
3. Arms  drills: This  refers  to  drill  carried  out  with  weapon  which  are 
incorporated  into  ceremonial  parade.  The  use  of  weapons  on  parade  dates 
back to the evolution of warfare and it is aimed at showcasing the lethality 
of  a  force  and  expertise  in  the  use  of  its  weapons.  In  today  parades  the 
weapons  carried  are  ceremonial  and  do  not  bear  ammunition  except  blank 
ammunition on special occasions such as funeral ceremonies. 
4. Sword  drills: Officers  are  known  by  swords  they  carry.  Sword  drills  are 
taught  to  officers  who  bear  and  use  sword  on  parade.  Although  in  the 
military,  warrant  officers  carry  swords  on  parades  they  do  not  draw  them 
except during trooping and presentation of color parade. Two qualities that 
should  be  pursued  in  sword  drill  are  accuracy  and  graceful  movement.  All 
officers  are  to  ensure  that  they  practice  and  perfect  the  movements  in 
sword drills. 
5. Cane and stick drills: Cane and stick drills involve the use of cane and pace 
stick usually by RSM  It is often required to appoint recruits as cane/stick 
orderlies  to  reviewing/visiting  officers  during  ceremonial  parades.  These 
orderlies  act  as  guides  to  the  reviewing  officer.  The  pace  stick  drill  is 

54 
 
mainly meant for SNCO's and drill instructors that are required to bear the 
sticks. 
6. Sentry drill: Sentry  drills  are  carried  out  by  sentries  to  enable  them  pay 
compliments,  challenge  intruders,  turn  out  the  guard  and  patrol  while  at 
their  sentry  posts.  The  drills  are  intended  to  ensure  that  the  sentries 
remain at alert throughout the duration of their duty. 
7. Mounted drills: Mounted drills are conducted with an officer on a horse. It 
is  well  known  custom  for  army  officers  to  ride  on  a  horse  back  especially 
officers of guard brigade. Adjutant of the Nigerian Defense Academy and 
officers  of  Depot  NA  during  ceremonial  parades.  This  type  of  drill  is  not 
applicable to some Para-military parades. 
11.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF A GOOD PARADE COMMANDER 
A parade commander should possess the following characteristics:  
a. A parade commander must have a good understanding of parade.  
b. A parade Commander should be highly regimented.  
c. Skilled in commanding parade and inspiring presence.  
d. Possess an exceptional marching technique.  
e. His vocal are loud and easily understood.  
f. Highly responsible and reliable.  
g. A team player.  
h. A highly focused Officer.  
j. A teacher and a teachable spirit.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 
 
 
12. THE ROAD SAFETY AUDIT, CONCEPT, PROCEDURE AND EXECUTION 
Road Safety Audit (RSA) and Road Safety Inspection (RSI) are used to test the 
safety  of  the  road  infrastructure.  These  two  words  are  different  from  each 
other  but  are  interchangeably  used  by  many.  The  RSA  is  used  for  design  and 
construction of new roads /rehabilitation of existing of roads, whereas the RSI is 
used for evaluating existing roads. The aim of RSA is to improve the road safety 
before  the  road  is  built  or  reconstructed.  At  present  not  many  RSA  are  carried 
out in Nigeria. In other country the RSA has shown its road safety value. The RSI 
also  contribute  to  road  safety.  This  is  carried  out  periodically  on  an  entire  road 
network,  and  interim  inspection  on  road  section  that  have  an  above  average 
number of crashes and on road structure where there are structural failures and 
damage as result of crashes.  
Federal Road safety Corps was established in 1988 and was charged among others 
with   responsibility   of   recommending   works   and   devices.   This   responsibility 
registers the stake of the Federal Road Safety in the procurement, operation and 
maintenance of road infrastructure to step down the risking wave of RTC. In view 
of  the  foregoing,  to  ensure  effective  and  efficient  implementation  of  the 
responsibility  there  is  need  for  RSA  and  RSI.  Inadvertently,  this  duty  was 
performed in the PRS department as part of its research activities from 1988 to 
2009.  
The introduction of the Road Transport Safety Standardization Scheme (RTSSS) 
of  which  its  activities  include  fleet  inspection  of  vehicles  brought  the  idea  of 
professionalizing the inspection of road infrastructure and architecture, including 
the  vehicle  inspection.  This  prompted  the  establishment  of  Safety  Engineering 
Department (SED) in 2009. Since then, the department has witnessed various re- 
organizations  and  reforms.  Presently  this  important  section  of  the  Corps  is 
addressed as Corps Safety Engineering Office code named COSEN. 
COSEN carry out its activities through three major units, namely;  
a. Vehicle Inspection and Certification  
b. Accident Investigation and Analysis 
c. Traffic Engineering  
In   the   structure   the   RSA   and   RSI   (HI)   are   domiciled   with   the   Traffic 
Engineering.  In  most cases  RSA  and  RSI  have  always  been  mistaken  to  mean  the 
same thing because of similarity in approach and overall objective. This fact sheet 
will discuss both RSA and RSI and the road effect they may have. 

56 
 
 
What are RSAs and RSIs? 
Both  RSA  and  RSI  examine  the  road  infrastructure  exclusively  for  its  road 
safety.RSA  is  carried  out  to  test  the  design  of  the  new  roads  or  of  the 
reconstruction  of  existing  road.  The  examination  or  test  of  an  existing  road  is 
called the RSI.  
Definition of RSA 
It  is  planned  safety  performance  examination  of  future  Road  Intercession  and 
other  components  by  an  independent  audit  team,  to  ensure  safety  during  use.It 
qualitatively, quantitatively and frictionally analyzes the road structure and report 
on  potential  road  safety  issues  and  identifies  opportunities  for  improvement  for 
all road users. Van Schagan (2000) defines RSA as formal standardized procedure 
in  other  to  reach  an  independent  assessment  of  the  possible  road  safety 
consequences of the design. An RSA has a preventive character and aims to signal 
any potential road safety problems before the infrastructure is actually built and 
to  make  suggestions  for  improvement.  RSA  can  therefore  be  defined  as  a 
prevalence  assessment  of  road  infrastructure  from  its  planning  stage  through 
construction  to  ensure  that  the  safety  concerns  are  addressed  through  critical 
examination  of  designs  and  ongoing  construction  works  before  the  structure  is 
commissioned for use. The level is cheaper than recommendation for RSI.  
12.1 ROAD SAFETY INSPECTION 
The  RSI  involves  teams  of  experts  that  visually  inspect  the  existing  road 
infrastructure  or  road  network  for  different  forms  of  fault  regularly  and 
systematically. This are usually done using checklist that are similar to those used 
in RSA. The  European directive 2008/96/EG defines RSI as an ordinary periodic 
assessment   of   road   features   and   deficiencies   which   from   a   road   safety 
perspective make maintenance necessary (EP & R 2008).  
It is also defined by (Mocsair, T. et al, 2006) as: 
a.  A preventive tool,  
b.  Consisting  of  a  regular,  systematic,  on-site  inspection  of  existing 
roads, covering the whole road network,  
c.  Carried out by trained safety expert teams  
d.  Resulting  in  a  formal  report  on  detected  road  hazards  and  safety 
issues  
e.  Requiring a formalresponse by the relevant road authority.  
 

57 
 
 
12.2 PRINCIPLE OF RSA AND RSI 
a. The  elements  included  in  the  road  safety  inspections  should  stand  as  risk 
factors for accident or injuries.  
b. Inspections   should   be   standardized   and   designed   to   ensure   that   all 
elements  included  are  covered  and  are  assessed  in  an  objective  manner. 
Initial stages of implementation checklist may be helpful.  
c. Both RSA and RSI are intended to be used by road authorities. 
d. RSA  involves  in  the  design  of  road  traffic  plans  and  is  always  done  by  an 
independent  audit  team  carrying  out  RSA.  In  addition  to  the  RSA  an  RSI 
involves two or more road safety experts who carry out inspection cost and 
benefit of an RSA and RSI.  
12.3 IMPORTANCE OF RSA AND RSI 
The  major  benefits  of  RSA  and  RSI  are  implicated  in  the  cost  saved  on  crashes 
that  have  been  prevented  by  audit  recommendations.  Other  qualitative  benefits 
include:  
a.  Reduce risk of crashes and repair works.  
b.  Reduction of total project cost.  
c.  Creation  of  greater  awareness  of  road  safety  and  quality  in  design 
processes.  
d.  Provision of better facilities for vulnerable road users.  
e.  Contribute towards achieving better road safety targets.  
f.  Guarantee better standard and design guideline.  
 
12.4 RSA/RSI COST 
a. Cost can vary greatly depending on the size of the project and the phase in 
which audit take place.  
b. There are two major costs (Direct and Indirect)  
c. Direct  Cost:  These  include  time  spent  by  auditors  and  the  extra  time  the 
designers need to include recommendations in the design.  
d. Indirect    Cost:    These    are    the    extra    costs    of    construction    and 
reconstruction activities that result from audit recommendations.  
12.5 IMPLEMENTATION 
In  Nigeria  many  road  agencies,  designers,  contractors  and  road  authorities  are 
yet  to  key  into  road  safety  audit  scheme  for  fear  of  perceived  implications.  In 
Nigeria  the  federal  ministry  of  works  has  consistently  worked  with  federal 

58 
 
ministry  of  works  in  this  regard.  Implementation  of  RSA  typically  include  the 
following steps  
a. Selecting   or   identifying   projects   from   different  stages  of   high   way 
procurement (planning to operation)  
b. Management approval  
c. Selecting RSA team  
d. Sensitization of RSA team  
e. Gathering information needed to conduct audit  
f. Conducting the audit  
12.6 BEST PRACTICES 
The guidelines for good RSI, suggested by Elvik (2006) consist of seven items:  
The  elements  included  in  road  safety  inspection  should  stand  as  risk  for  factors 
for accident or injuries; Inspections should be standardized as designed to ensure 
that  all  elements  included  are  covered  and  are  accessed  in  objective  manner. 
Check  list maybe  helpful. Checklist for  RSI  should  include  the  following cases  of 
recognized important elements.  
a.  The quality of traffic signs with respect to their need and to whether they 
are correctly placed or legible in the dark  
b. The quantity road markings in particular whether they visible or consistent 
with traffic signs.   
c. The quantity of the road surface characteristics in particular with respect 
to friction (macro and micro texture) and evenness  
d.  The   adequacy   of   sight   distances   and   the   absence   of   permanent   or 
temporary obstacles that prevent timely observation of road or other road 
users.  
e.  The presence  of  road  side  traffic  hazards  near  the  carriageway,  such  as 
trees, exposed rocks, drainage pipes and culverts, steep embankment slope 
and so on.  
f.  Aspect of traffic operation, in particular if drivers speed are adequate to 
local conditions and to function of the road. These include the suitability of 
the  road  to  its  function  and  adequacy  of  space  for  current  traffic  and 
separation between motorized and vulnerable road users.  
g. The quantity of the road surface characteristics in particular with respect 
to friction (macro and micro texture) and evenness  
h.  The   adequacy   of   sight   distances   and   the   absence   of   permanent   or 
temporary obstacles that prevent timely observation of road or other road 
users.  

59 
 
i.  The  presence  of  road  side  traffic  hazards  near  the  carriageway,  such  as 
trees, exposed rocks, drainage pipes and culverts, steep embankment slope 
and so on.  
j.  Aspect of traffic operation, in particular if drivers speed are adequate to 
local conditions and to function of the road. These include the suitability of 
the  road  to  its  function  and  adequacy  of  space  for  current  traffic  and 
separation between motorized and vulnerable road users.  
k. . RSI should state their findings and propose safety measures by means of 
standardized reports.  
l. Inspectors  should  be  formally  qualified;  they  should  meet  regularly  to 
ensure a uniform application of safety principles.  
i. must be able to determine direction of internal forces  
ii. have knowledge of the behavior of construction materials  
iii. be able to determine source of tension and structural failures  
iv. knowledge of mechanics and statics  
v. knowledge of survey and measurement  
vi. knowledge of soil  
vii. knowledge of hydraulics and hydrology  
viii. be able to sketch and read design drawings  
ix. vast in road safety  
m. Therefore,  inspection  team  should  consist  of  experience  road  safety 
personnel  and  engineers  while  the  team  leader  should  be  a  civil  engineer 
related professionals that have good understanding of material properties, 
statics  and  mechanics,  know  nomenclatures  of  road  infrastructure  element 
and  be  able  to  read  and  interpret  design  drawings.  Experienced  register 
/certified engineer from among the list below {five to 10years professional 
qualification with road safety experience is essential}  
i.  Civil Engineer  
ii.  Building engineer  
iii.  Land surveyor  
iv.  Agricultural engineer  
v.  Structural engineer  
vi.  Transportation engineer  
 
12.7 DUTIES OF DESIGN TEAM LEADERS AND AUDIT TEAM LEADERS 
a. DTL (Design Team Leader). The duties of DTL include the following: 
i. Balance   activities   of   the   design   team   with   the   information 
requirement and final output of RSA team  

60 
 
ii. Must explain to the design team the importance of RSA process  
iii. Provide the proper information to the RSA team  
iv. He is to expedite request from RSA team  
v. He is to establish procedures for incorporating back into the project 
the RSA team input   
b. ATL (Audit Team Leaders) The duties of ATL include the following: 
i. Pre audit meeting  
ii. Communicate information to team members  
iii. Determine the scope of and parameter for Road Safety Audits  
iv. Assign roles to team members  
v. Preparation of report  
vi. Post inspection meeting with road owner and designer  
vii. To ensure that audit is within the scope planned for.  
12.8 RESPONSIBILITIES OF ROAD SAFETY AUDITOR 
a. Auditors are expected to fully understands RSA policies  
b. It is their role to understand the parameters of the audit to cover  
c.  It is their responsibilities to identify specific safety issues  
d.  When in road life cycle to carry out Audit  
e.  Suggest potential solutions to any safety concerns  
f.  The RSA team is responsible for reporting on all safety concerns identified 
even if the terms may be considered controversial  
g.  Well defined roles for audit team members which is communicated to both 
the design team and audit team will smoothen out the relationship between 
the auditors and the designers.  
h.  Lastly, there should be follow up of RSA and RSI after some time to check 
if the proposed measure have been implemented or not  
12.9 CHALLENGES TO THE ROAD SAFETY AUDIT 
a. Limited time allocation: 18km is the minimum distance to be covered daily  
b. Lack  of  Audit  instruments  such  as:  optic  level,  Theodolites  and  RIM 
Machine etc  
c. Lack of adequate protection to Audit team members  
d. Lack of funds, no enough funds to facilitate comprehensive auditing  
e. Lack of field vehicle  
f. Lack  of  information  from  Road  designers/  owner  and  when  available, 
information may be inadequate  
g. Implementation  of  the  identified  safety  issues  by the  responding agencies 
could pose serious changes especially when it is on existing roads.  

61 
 
h. Non-acceptability of  RSA  and  RSI  by  other  road  authorities  especially 
when conducted by unqualified personnel.  
i. Not  following  a  standardized  guidelines  like  the  ASHTO,  EURO  Code  etc. 
mix reports not uniform and in most cases lacks ingredients necessary.  
12.10 WAY FORWARD 
a. Training of staffs that have basic qualifications to be auditors.  
b.  Optimizing  the  postings  of  the  engineers  to  the  corps  and  ensure  that  all 
Zones and Sectors have qualified Engineers as COSEN desk officer.  
c.  Make provision for field vehicles at the Headquarters and Zonal levels  
d.  Process equipment and tools  
e.  Effective collaboration between Road owners and other stakeholders  
f.  To start a legislative process that will make it mandatory for road owners 
and  designers  ensure  input  of  the  nation  road  safety  lead  agency  from 
planning stage to operation level of road infrastructure.  
g.  To  add  extra  one  month  to  Engineering  cadets  among  the  newly  recruited 
staff  passing  through  the  academy  to  be  trained  on  bans  of  RSA  and  RSI 
audits.  
h.  More   Road   Safety   audit   are   required   to   intimate   the   design   and 
maintenance agencies, law and policies makers for road infrastructures this 
will help politicians judge the inability of Audit Inspection as part of quality 
assurance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
13. OVERVIEW OF FRSC IT PLATFORMS 
THE LIST OF FRSC e-APPLICATIONS 
 
S/N 
 
APPLICATION 
 
URL – ADDRESS 
1 FRSC official website https://frsc.gov.ng 
2 National Vehicle Identification Scheme 
(NVIS) 
https://nvis.frsc.gov.ng 
3 Nigeria  Driver‟s Licence (NDL) website https://nigeriadriverslicence.org 
4 Foreign Driver‟s Licence 
http://foreigndriverslicence.frsc.gov.ng 
5 Unified  Field Operations System https://fieldops.frsc.gov.ng 
https://fieldopsmobile.frsc.gov.ng 
(Android version) 
6 Speed Limiting Device Management System https://speedlimiter.frsc.gov.ng 
7 Road Transport Safety Standardisation 
Scheme (RTSSS) 
https://rtsss.frsc.gov.ng 
8 Driving School Standardisation Programme 
(DSSP) 
https://dssp.frsc.gov.ng 
9 Duty Room Information Management System http://ops1.frsc.gov.ng 
10 Annual Performance Evaluation Reports 
System 
https://apers.frsc.gov.ng 
11 FRSC Academy 
https://academy.frsc.gov. ng 
12 FRSC Signage https://signage.frsc.gov.ng 
13 FileMailTracker https://fmt.frsc.gov.ng 
14 FRSC Stakeholders and Partnership Portal 
http://stakeholders.frsc.gov.ng 
15 FRSC Dashboard https://intranet.frsc.gov.ng 
16 Post Service Scheme (PSS) 
http://pss.frsc.gov.ng 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
14. THE ART OF PUBLIC SPEAKING 
The Federal Road Safety Corps as an agency came into being as a result of a great 
social problem. The problem was road traffic crashes and the attendant misery 
that it brings to people. Apart from taking lives, it maims many and renders them 
unproductive and dependent on others for survival. It is a settled fact that the 
human factor is the most potent factor responsible for road crashes. Therefore, 
to reduce road traffic crashes to the barest possible minimum, there is a need for 
attitudinal change towards road usage in the society. This can be only achieved 
through persistent, interesting, scholarly but informative, clear, concise, and 
corrective preaching of the message of safety consciousness in every available 
forum. 
Such forums include, but not limited to; Motor Park rallies, television talk shows, 
radio programmes, interviews, etc. 
14.1 Qualities of a Good Speech 
a. Any good speech must have certain qualities that ensure the fulfillment of 
its purpose  
b. And that purpose is to convey ideas or information from the speaker to the 
audience.  
c. As such, the speech has to be: simple, clear, concise, forceful, and pleasing. 
14.2 Qualities of a Good Speaker 
According to George Kaitholil, a good speaker should have ELOQUENCE, and this 
is made up of the following: 
a. Earnestness 
b. Observation 
c. Quick wittedness 
d. Useful intention 
e. Enthusiasm 
f. Confidence in self 
g. Empathy  
14.3 Dos and Don’ts of a Good Speaker 
a. Be audience-oriented, know the level of education of your listeners, their 
interest, views and sensibilities and this will help you to know how best to 
put your ideas across to them. 

64 
 
b. Be a good listener, when you listen to other speakers you learn more and 
become a better speaker. 
c. Listen to yourself as you speak- The volumes of your voice, the speed of 
talk, the inflection, hesitations and punctuations are very important.  
d. You must have a deep understanding of the topic you are speaking about- 
carry out adequate research on the topic and ensure you have all the facts 
and figures at your fingertips. 
e. Make conscientious effort to achieve the optimum response. 
f. Take responsibilities for what you say 
g. Know your limitations, and be honest enough to acknowledge them. 
h. Do not be over confident, and do not put on airs. 
14.4 Types of Speeches 
There can be as many kinds of speeches, as there are speakers, audience, and 
occasions.Some examples are: 
a. Lecture 
b. Narrative or descriptive speech 
c. Sermon  
d. Political speech 
e. Funeral oration 
f. Vote of Thanks (Speech) 
g. Closing speech 
h. Valedictory speech 
i. Toast 
j. Debate speech 
14.5 The Procedure for an Effective Speech Delivery: 
It is a well-accepted fact that practice makes perfect. For you to successfully 
deliver a speech the following steps should be taken: 
a. Plan the speech 
b. Prepare the speech 
c. Practice the speech  
d. Perform the speech  
 

65 
 
i. HOW TO START: You must conquer stage fright. Once you have mastered 
your speech through proper planning and rehearsal, there is no reason why you 
should fidget: 
ii. ADDRESS OR SALUTATION: When you are called upon to give your 
speech, you have to walk briskly and gracefully to the podium looking straight 
with a smile and an air of importance and confidence around you. 
iii. THE OPENING SENTENCE: The opening words should elicit the goodwill 
of the listeners and make them benevolent towards you. 
The speech should therefore be made up of: 
a. Greeting  
b. Opening sentence 
c. Introduction 
d. Main Body 
e. Conclusion 
iv. HOW TO STOP: The conclusion should be well planned to make an impact. 
It should be a well-directed effort to impress on the audience, the views and 
sentiments you have already expressed. 
v. HOW LONG TO SPEAK: According to la Rochefoucauld, true eloquence 
consist in saying all that is necessary, and nothing but necessary.Therefore 
while delivering your speech, keep the KISS acronym in mind i.e.  
a) Keep 
b) It 
c) Short and 
d) Simple 
e) Not by mouth alone. 
vi. USE OF GESTURES: Gestures are motions of the body meant to add grace 
and expression to speech. They are effective natural aids a speaker can use in 
expressing himself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

66 
 
“PSYCHOSOCIAL MANAGEMENT OF ONESELF IN A DYNAMIC SOCIETY” 
INTRODUCTION 
Major  Depressive  Disorders caused  3.9%  of  annual  lived  disability  (YLDS)  in 
Nigeria.  The  most  common  health  issues  in  Nigeria  are  depression  and  anxiety, 
which are prevalent among the youth and young adults. 
About  60  million  Nigerians  either  have  Mental  or  psychosocial  disorders,  these 
numbers will increase due to uncertain economic and social dynamics. The current 
and  sudden  Government  policies  of  increase  in  Fuel  prices  and  exchange  rates, 
unemployment, under-employment, food insecurity, etc. without any corresponding 
Socio-economic  support  will  lead  to  increase  in  psychosocial  disorders  with 
attendant   consequences,   such   as   alcoholism   and   drug   dependence,   suicide 
tendencies, etc. 
What is psychosocial disorder? 
Psychosocial  Disabilities arises   when   someone   with   mental   health   condition 
interact  with  a  social  environment  that  presents  barriers  to  their  equality  with 
other individuals. 
The  Psychosocial  disorder  could  also  be  influenced  by  life  experiences  as  well  as 
maladjusted cognitive and  behavioral processes. The term psychosocial could also 
be  referred  to  as  psychological  and  social  factors  that  influence  mental  health. 
Social  influences  such  as  peer  pressure,  parental  support,  cultural  and  religious 
background,  social  economic  status  and  inter  personal  relationships  all  help  to 
shape    personality    and    influence    psychological    makeup.    Individuals    with 
psychosocial  disorders  frequently  have  difficulty  functioning  in  social  situation 
and may have problems effectively communicating with others. 
 
 
 

67 
 
CAUSES OF MENTAL HEALTH AND PSYCHOSOCIAL DISORDERS 
Mental illness like physical illness is due to multiple causes. There are many known 
factors of agent, host and environment in the natural histories of mental disorder. 
Among the known factors are the following; 
 Organic Conditions: Mental  illnesses  may have  their origin  in  organic 
conditions  such  as  cerebral  arteriosclerosis,  neoplasm,  metabolic 
diseases,   neurological   diseases,   endocrine   diseases   and   chronic 
diseases such as tuberculosis, leprosy, epilepsy, etc. 
 Heredity:  Heredity  may  be  an  important  factor  in  some  cases.  For 
example,  the  child  of  two  schizophrenia  parents  is  40  times  more 
likely to develop schizophrenic than is the child of healthy parents. 
 Social Pathological Causes: To produce any disease, there must be a 
combination  of  genetic  and  environmental  factors.  The  social  and 
environmental  factors  associated  with  mental  ill  health  comprise; 
worries,  anxieties,  emotional  stress.  Tension,  frustration,  unhappy 
marriages,  broken  homes,  poverty,  industrialization,  urbanization, 
changing  family  structure,  population  mobility,  economic  insecurity, 
cruelty,  rejection  ,  neglect  and  the  like.  The  social  environment  not 
only  determines  the  individual‟s  attitudes  but  also  provides  the 
“framework” within which mental health is formulated. 
Environmental  factors  other  than  psychosocial  ones  capable  of  producing 
abnormal human behaviour are:  
 Toxic  substances: Carbon  disulfide,  mercury  manganese,  tin,  lead 
compounds etc. 
 Psychotropic drugs: Barbiturates, alcohol, griseofulvin. 
 Nutritional factors: Deficiency of thiamine, pyridoxine 
 Minerals: Deficiency of iodine. 

68 
 
 Infective  agents: Infectious  disease  (e.g.,  measles,  rubella)  during 
the prenatal and post-natal periods of life may have adverse effects 
on the brain‟s development and the integration of mental functions. 
 Traumatic factors: Road and occupational accidents. 
 Radiation: Nervous  system  is  most  sensitive  to  radiation  during  the 
period of neural development. 
CRUCIAL POINTS IN THE LIFE CYCLE OF HUMAN BEINGS 
There  are  certain  key  points  in  the  development  of  the  human  being  which  are 
important from the point of view of mental health. These are; 
 Prenatal  period:  Pregnancy  is  a  stressful  period  for  some  women. 
They need help not only for their physical but also emotional needs. 
 First  5  years  of  life: The  roots  of  mental  health  are  in  early 
childhood.  The  infant  and  young  child  should  experience  a  warm, 
intimate and continuous relationship with his mother and father. It is 
in  this  relationship  where  underlies  the  development  of  mental 
health.  It  follows that  broken  homes  are  likely  to  produce  behavior 
disorders in children and this has been confirmed by several studies. 
 School  child:  Everything  that  happens  in  the  school  affects  the 
mental  health  of  the  child.  The  programmes  and  practices  of  the 
school  may  satisfy  or  frustrate  the  emotional  needs  of  the  child. 
Children who  have  emotional  problems  may need  child  guidance  clinic 
or  psychiatric  services.  From  the  learning,  proper  teacher-pupil 
relationship and climate of the class room are very important.  
 Adolescence: The transition from adolescence to manhood is often a 
stormy one and fraught with dangers to mental health, manifested in 
the   form   of   mental   ill   health   among   the   young,   and   juvenile 
delinquents in particular. The basic needs of the adolescence are 
A. The need to be needed by others, 

69 
 
B. The need for increasing independence, 
C. The need to achieve adequate adjustment to the opposite sex  
D. The need to rethink the cherished beliefs of one‟s elders. The 
failure  to  recognize  and  understand  these  basic  needs  may 
prevent sound mental development. 
 Old  age:  The  mental  health  problems  of  the  aged  have  received 
considerable  attention  in  recent  times  in  the  developed  countries. 
The causes of mental illness in the aged are organic conditions of the 
brain, economic insecurity, lack of home, poor status and insecurity. 
Thus through his life, the needs of man remain the same; the need for affection, 
the  need  for  belonging,  the  need  for  independence,  the  need  for  a  sense  of 
personal  worth  and  the  need  for  self-actualization.  These  needs  only  differ  in 
degree and qualitative importance at various ages. 
WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS OF PSYCHOSOCIAL DISORDERS? 
A. Feeling sad 
B. Confused thinking or reduced ability to concentrate 
C. Excessive fears or worried extreme feeling of guilt 
D. Extreme mood changes of highs and lows 
E. Significant tiredness, low energy or problems sleeping 
F. Detachment from reality (delusion) paranoid or hallucination 
G. Inability to cope with daily or stress 
H. Trouble understanding and relating to situations and people 
I. Problem with alcohol or drug use 
J. Major changes in eating habits 
K. Sex drive changes 
L. Excessive anger, hostility or violence 
M. Suicidal thinking 
(ii) Others are psychosomatic symptoms 

70 
 
I. Stomach pain 
II. Back pain 
III. Frequent headaches 
IV. Unexplained fever and pains. 
COMPLICATIONS OF PSYCHOSOCIAL DISORDER 
Untreated    mental    and    psychosocial    disorders    can    cause    severe 
complications such as; 
A. Unhappiness and decreased enjoyment of life 
B. Family conflicts 
C. Relationship difficulties 
D. Social isolation 
E. Problems with tobacco, alcohol and other drugs 
F. Missed work or school 
G. Legal and financial problems 
H. Poverty and homelessness 
I. Self harm and harm to others including suicide or homicide 
J. Weaken immune system 
K. Heart disease, peptic ulcer, and other medical diseases.  
PSYCHOSOCIAL MANAGEMENT AND PREVENTIVES MEASURES 
Primary:  Primary  prevention  operates  on  a  community  basis.  This  consists  of 
“improving the  social  environment”,  and  promotion  of  the  social,  emotional  and 
physical  well-being  of  all  people.  It  includes  working  for  better  living  conditions 
and improved health and welfare resources in the community. 
A. Early diagnosis and treatment 
B. Rehabilitation 
C. Group and individual psychotherapy 
D. Mental health education 
E. Use of modern psychoactive drugs 

71 
 
F. Follow-up and after care services. 
CONCLUSION: Mental  and  psychosocial  disorders  have  adverse  effects  on 
individual,  occupation  and  community and  these disorders  can  be  managed  by self 
understanding, identity formation, social relationships and enhance their ability to 
return to normality after experiencing adverse events. 
EMERGING  CHALLENGES  OF  FIELD  COMMANDS  OPERATIONS/THE  WAY 
FORWARD 
INTRODUCTION/GENERAL OVERVIEW 
The  primary  responsibility  of  the Federal  Road  Safety  Corps  is  to  ensure  that 
roads  in  Nigeria are safe  for  all  road  users  through  highly visible  and  responsive 
patrol operations. 
2. The  risks  involved  in  this  engagement  is  generally  high  especially  with  the 
recent rise  in  the  security challenges  confronting the  Nation mostly perpetrated 
using the road as major means of movement. 
3. Aside  the  foregoing,  some  of  the  challenges  faced  by  the  Corps  are  self 
inflicted  by  staff  who  have  compromised  ethical  standard  and  relegated  the 
operational strategies to be applied to the background, for personal gains. 
AIM OF THE SUBMISION 
4. The  submission  is  aimed  at  presenting  some  of  these  challenges  without 
being too academic by making it as practical as possible when faced with real life 
scenarios that require on the spot resolution. 
5. Your work experiences as front liners in the field is expected to be brought 
to bear, where-in the quality of your responses to occurrences while out there will 
be open to you for self scrutiny and self assessment especially with the prevailing 
security situation which makes your safety paramount. 
6. Which  means  that  your  ability  to  sense  eminent  danger  is  paramount,  and 
therefore  requires  that  staff  must  have  a  deep  inbuilt  capacity  for  alertness, 
critical  thinking,  prompt  problem  solving  skills,  sound  judgment,  confidence, 
interpersonal  skills,  physical  fitness,  tactfulness,  self-control,  mental  attitude, 
responsibility and trust worthiness, reliability, loyalty to the job which is key. 
SOME OF THE EMERGING OPERATIONAL CHALLENGESS 

72 
 
ROLES  OF  PATROL  TEAM  MEMBERS  NOT  CLEARLY  DEFINED/WRONG 
POSITIONING 
7. Roles of individual members of a Patrol Team not clearly defined as a basis 
for ensuring strict compliance while on the road, resulting to one of the causes of 
knock down of Marshals. 
8. The  respective  role  to  be  played  must  be  clearly  defined  and  the  role 
process  owner  to  be  held  accountable  for  any  action  or  inaction.  This  is  without 
prejudice that the team work is the watch word. 
9. In  the  same  vein,  the  roles  to  be  played  by each  member  of  the  team  is 
directly related to the positioning of the patrol vehicle and patrol bike as the case 
may  be,  which  also  has  to  do  with  the  positioning  of  members  of  the  team  in 
relation to allowable spacing. 
HIT AND RUN VEHICLES/CHASING OFFENDERS 
10. Improper spacing while on patrol and the unprofessional habit of standing in 
front of moving vehicles or jumping on vehicle bonnet OR hanging of vehicle doors 
in  an  attempt  to  stop  the  offender,  is  not  only  shameful  but  exposes  the 
perpetrators to the risk of the actions of hit and run drivers. 
11. When confronted with such potential risks, all the patrol team needs to do 
is to note down the vehicle registration number of the vehicle for tracing through 
the NVIS. 
12. The  foregoing  completely  makes  unnecessary,  the  dangerous  habit  of 
chasing  offenders  with  the  attendant  high  risk  and  possibility  of  causing  road 
traffic crashes. 
COMPROMISED BOOKINGS 
13. None  adherence  to  primary  offence  sighting  as  a  basis  for  stopping  a 
vehicle  which  in  a number  of  occasions, set  the stage  for  misconducts  whereby a 
driver  is  threatened  with  DLV  offence  which  is  a  secondary  offence,  only  to  be 
booked  for  a  primary  offence  which  fine  is  less,  after  extracting  an  unethical 
compromise. 
14. Failure  to  fully  explain  the  offence  committed  by  the  offender  before 
booking,  thus  setting  the  stage  for  compromised  bookings  in  the  event  the 
offender insists that the offence committed be explained to him. 

73 
 
15. Malicious  bookings  of  offenders  for  either  refusing  to  compromise  or  for 
questioning why they were being stopped in the first place, opens up the space for 
avoidable  conflicts  that  could  result  to  far  reaching  negative  consequences 
especially as it affects the image of the Corps.  
16. Malicious  booking  of  offenders  because  of  the rude  conduct  of  the 
passengers  being  conveyed  has  negative  impact  of  the  expected  commitment  of 
the  patrol  team  whose  main  focus  should  be  on  the  driver.  A  patrol  team  has  no 
compulsive  need  to  engage  a  rude  passenger  based  on  his/her  utterances  which 
may appear  offensive.    Unfortunately  some  patrol  teams  transfer  the  burden  of 
such  aggressive  disposition  of  the  passengers  unjustly  to  the  offender  via 
malicious  bookings.  It  is  an  unfortunate  development  that  should  not  be  allowed 
for being unfair.  
IMPOUNDMENT MALPRACTISES 
17. Vehicles  to  be  impounded  at  patrol  locations  which  are  to  be  escorted  to 
the  base  are  sometimes  being  diverted  away  from  the  base  after  negotiated 
unethical settlements between the offender and the arresting Marshals. This can 
only  happened  when  the  patrol  team  leader  is  compromised.  To  avoid  such  acts, 
the  booking  of  the  vehicle  to  be  so  impounded  must  be  done  at  the  scene  or  at 
least the process of the commenced. 
18. Vehicles impounded at the base released without necessary bookings or any 
evidence to show they were impounded in the first place, in exchange for unethical 
compromises.  Vehicles  to  be  impounded  at  the  base  must  be  entered  into  an 
impoundment  register  at  the  entry  gate  and  after  being  released,  the  register 
must   be   updated with   the   signature   of   the   offender   while   presenting   an 
impoundment  release  slip  to  be  so  endorsed  by  the  Head  of  Operations  or  any 
officer to be so designated to advance such endorsements. 
19. The foregoing arrangement will indemnify FRSC from any legal proceedings 
that may arise with regards to the status of such released impounded vehicle. 
20. Offenders  of  impounded  vehicles  must  be  made  to  endorse  the  fact  that 
they  have  removed  all  movable  valuables  from  their  vehicles  before  leaving  the 
base to consummate fines payment processes.  
21. Arresting Marshals driving impounded vehicles to the base contrary to laid 
down regulations against such practices has grave consequences. The vehicle could 
be  involved  in  a  crash  with  the  arresting  Marshal  as  the  driver, or  the  offender 

74 
 
could  claim  he  left  valuables  in  the  vehicle  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  when 
finally allowed to access to the impounded vehicle at the base. 
22. The best bet under the circumstances is to get the services of a tow truck 
to be paid for by the offender, in the alternative, the services of any proximate 
Police station may be necessary to keep in custody the abandoned vehicle with full 
incident  report  made  at  the  station,  with  a  caveat  that  the  vehicle  can  only  be 
released  to  the  offender  based  on  clearance  from  FRSC.  Obviously,  the  custody 
fee will be paid to the Police. 
RUDE CONDUCT 
23. Negative  and  rude  disposition  of  patrol  staff  in  engaging  offenders  which 
often  at  times  over  heat  the  patrol  scene  to  the  extent  of  attracting  avoidable 
mob  attacks,  has  always  been  a  contentious  issue  with  violent  consequences  and 
avoidable legal processes. 
24. It is obvious that based on human nature, nobody wants to be contravened 
for going against expected norms and will therefore be agitated when confronted 
under such circumstances. You don‟t expect such offender to be happy. Any rude 
conduct  towards  handling  the  arrest  processes  may  bring  out  the  bottled  up 
frustration which sometimes may be insulting of violent. Being calm, understanding 
and  respectful  on  the  part of  the  patrol  team  members  is  all  that  is  required  to 
avoid any confrontation. 
25. Unnecessary   exchange   of   words   with   offenders   and   needless   rude 
engagement  of  passengers  whose  disposition  have  no  positive  values  should  be 
avoided by all means possible. Been calm and friendly may just be what is required 
to  calmly  educate  them  on  the  danger  for  which  the  driver  was  arrested,  if  the 
situation warrants. 
26. Attempting  to  effect  arrest  of  offenders  at  all  cost  whereby  arresting 
Marshals use their body to wedge or stop vehicles is not only primitive but paints 
FRSC  in  bad  light.  No  traffic  offence  is  worth  the  life  of  a  staff  or  in  fact  any 
other person. 
27. Appropriate  positioning  of  patrol  team  members  will  avail  any  of  the  team 
members  to  concentrate  on  vehicle  registration  numbers  of  vehicles  to  be 
arrested,  so  that  in  the  event  the  offender  violently  evades  arrests  his  vehicle 
registration number can be noted for NVIS intervention. 
GENERAL PATROL MISCONDUCT 

75 
 
28. There  is  an  unfortunate  rise  in the  incidences  of  patrol  misconducts  by 
patrol  teams  which  embarrassingly  is  sometimes  in  active  collaboration  with  the 
Commanding  officer  and  Heads  of  Operations  to  the  extent  of  assuming  the 
status of an institutionalized arrangement albeit erroneously. Patrol misconduct in 
which  ever  guise  only  reflects  the  premium  we  place  on  human  lives,  that  is,  the 
content  of  your  compromise  is  the  value  you  place  on  human  lives  including yours. 
Let your conscience judge you. 
29. Misconducts,  aside  undermining  our  expected  commitment  in  checking  the 
menace of road crashes and service to humanity, the moral fabric of the Corps as 
a  humanitarian  organization  suffers  substantial  erosion,  thus  not  only  painting  us 
in  bad  light  before  members  of  the  public,  puts  to  question  our  relevance  as  an 
organization in adding value to the country‟s development. 
30. Some staff have so institutionalized Patrol Misconducts to the extent that 
offenders  are  sometimes  forced  to  compromise  using  ATM  for  payments  or 
forced  to  make  payments  to  account  numbers  of  POS  Agents  for  onward 
withdrawal of the monies so paid at the end of patrol operations. This act is being 
perpetrated to evade Surveillance arrests. 
RESCUE OPERATIONS 
31. Rescue  operations  has  been  one  of  the  most  fundamental  commitment  of 
the  Corps  that  is  well  appreciated  by  the  public  because  it  represents  an 
uncommon commitment in the service to humanity. 
32. Therefore,  the  importance  the  Corps  should  attach  to  Rescue  Operations 
should enjoy the highest level of care and professionalism ranging from taking full 
charge  of  the  safety  requirement  of  the  crash  scenes  before  the  rescue  to  the 
evacuation of victims to proximate medical facilities and follow-ups. 
GENERAL OPERATIONAL EXPECTATIONS 
33. Staff  are  expected  to  continuously  update themselves  with  the  ever 
changing dynamics of technology while enforcing road traffic regulations. 
34. For   example   the   imperatives   of   NVIS,   the   working   dynamics   of   all 
verification  portals  for  SLD,  NDL,  Number  Plates,  etc  should  be  well  understood 
especially where a need arises to educate motorists while on patrol. 
FONDLING WITH PHONE WHILE ON PATROL 

76 
 
35. The distractive habit of fondling with your phone while on patrol or wearing 
of earpiece presents you to the public as an unserious law enforcement agent and 
as  such  loosing  the  expected  seriousness  the  public  will  accord  you.  It  is 
disrespectful and unacceptable to engage offenders with your earpiece affixed to 
your ear or a having a divided attention because of fondling with your phone. 
USE OF STICKS ON PATROL 
36. The habit of patrol teams using sticks in enforcing traffic regulations is too 
crude  and  unacceptable  because  it  paints  FRSC  as  an  organization  that  is 
operating  in  the  Stone  Age.  Such  acts  are  punishable  under  FRSC  Regulations  on 
Discipline because of its inconsistency.  
IMPROPER DRESSING 
37. Improper  dressing  has  always  been  an  issue  the  Corps  Management  is 
concerned about, because it is the way you dress that you are being addressed by 
the  public  and  the  quality  of  respect  you  attract  in  your  enforcement  of  road 
traffic regulations while on the road. 
38. What then is improper dressing? This can be defined as any dressing that is 
not as captured by the FRSC Dress Code; for example, wearing of slippers while in 
uniform, improper parking hair by female staff, painting of lips, painting of finger 
nails, non compliance with dress code as specified in part one order or operational 
dressing. 
39. Being improperly dressed, presents you to the public as a tout and which to 
a  large   extent  determines   the   quality  of   your   interaction   with   offenders, 
especially language usage and disposition. 
40. As  a regimented  outfit,  neatness  and  smartness  when  wearing the  uniform 
has  the  deep  capacity  of  building  within  you  a  positively  complex  self  confidence 
which   comes   with  boldness   and   sophisticated   calmness   when   enforcing   the 
regulations  on  the  road.  The  respect  you  get  from  the  public  by  been  properly 
dressed  goes  a long way  to  discourage  the  public  from  engaging in  a manner  that 
seems to suggest you are an uneducated Tout, known locally as Agbero. 
41. It  will  be  an  insult,  first  to  your  person  when  referred  to  as  an  Agbero 
while wearing FRSC uniform and an embarrassment to the corporate image of the 
Corps. 
GENERAL   INABILITY   BY   PATROL   TEAMS   TO   IDENTIFY   BREWING 
THREATS 

77 
 
42. Brewing  threats  have  visible  outlook,  but  patrol  teams  sometimes  neglect 
some  of  signs.  Incidentally,  the  Corps  provides  that  only  one  vehicle  should  be 
stopped  at  a  time,  because  stopping  several  vehicles  will  leave  the  patrol  team 
with  the  burden  of  managing  multiple  offenders  and  aggrieved  passengers  who 
consider  the  time  wasting  consequences  as  an  infringement  on  their  fundamental 
human rights. 
43. Tempers will obviously rise at which point any slight negative utterance may 
spark  off  violent  reactions from  not  only  the  offenders  but  the  passengers 
resulting  to  mob  attack.  Such  multiple  arrests  must  be  avoided  as  provided  for 
under operational regulations. 
EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE 
44. For the benefit of achieving a seamless enforcement commitment, staff are 
expected to be in tune with the basic expectations of Emotional Intelligence. 
45. Empathy  is  the  watchword  which  even if  expressed  should  not compromise 
enforcement standard at the same time not eliciting negative or violent reactions 
from offenders to be contravened or booked. 
46. Simply put, your actions or inactions should not attract unpalatable backlash 
from members of the public thus necessitating the need to be calm, firm and fair.  
GENERAL INDISCIPLINE 
47. Discipline, no doubt is the bedrock for any meaningful development to enjoy 
the  required  foundation,  which  makes  absolutely  necessary  that  our  conducts 
conforms with acceptable ethical standard. 
48. Staff were trained to differentiate between what is right and wrong and as 
such our actions and inactions are deliberate because we freely acceded to it. 
49. Incidentally,  whatever  staff  wish  to  throw  up  as  far  as  their  actions  and 
inactions  are  concerned,  is  fully  captured  in  the  FRSC  Regulations  of  Discipline, 
which prescribes sanctions appropriate to the infraction committed. 
50. Since  ignorance  is  not  an  excuse  and  that  staff  are  responsible  for  their 
conducts, it is incumbent on all to closely study the FRSC Regulations on Discipline 
in  order  to  appreciate  the  punishment  coded  for  each  infraction, some  of  which 
ends up in Dismissal from Service and prosecution in the Civil Court in the event of 
a worst case scenario. 
MISUSE OF SOCIAL MEDIA 

78 
 
51. The  improper  use  of  the  Social  Media  in  addressing  issues  or  grievances 
that  are  purely  internal  to  FRSC, have  continued  to  expose  Corps  to  avoidable 
public embarrassment leaving her image sometimes battered. 
52. Such  acts  are  not  acceptable  to  the  knowledge  and  understanding  of  all 
staff,  which  is  why  some  of  these  media  onslaughts  comes  under  anonymous  or 
fake names despite a clear evidence that it was an insider act. 
INTER-AGENCY RELATIONSHIP/ESPIRIT-DE-CORPS 
53. It is not in doubt that there is no organization that can operate in isolation 
thus  necessitating  the  need  to  explore  avenues  for  a  sustained  in  flow  of 
cooperation from relevant organizations especially the uniformed ones. 
54. Showing  respect  to  personnel  of  such  organizations  in  the  area  of  espirit-
de-corps  has  a  way  of  cementing  cordiality  especially  when  the  need  to  request 
for corporate  assistance, becomes necessary. 
55. However,  in  the  exercise  of  espirit-de-corps,  care  must  be  taking  not  to 
compromise ethical standards, thus making PE an admissible intervention to let go.  
DELAY IN HANDLING DISCIPLINARY CASES IN FIELD COMMANDS 
56. Undue delays from the field in dealing with disciplinary cases and cover ups 
by  Command,  has  continued  to  impact  negatively  on  the  corporate  interest  and 
responsibility of the Corps to the country. 
57. Such cases of cover ups are not condoned in the system and in the fullness 
of time, justice will prevail for the system and the society.  
CONCLUSION 
58. As earlier mentioned, the presentation is an attempt to be less academic or 
theoretical, in which case it is expected that you have found yourself in one or all 
of  the  scenarios  painted,  consequently,  it  is  expected  that  after  going  through, 
you  should  have  an  inbuilt  capacity  to  bridge  the  challenge  gap  when  asked  to 
connect the process, when confronted with a life test case scenario.  
 
 
 
 

79 
 
IMPLEMENTATION   OF   PRE-FITTED SPEED   LIMITING   DEVICES   IN 
VEHICLES IMPORTED OR LOCALLY PRODUCED /ASSEMBLED IN NIGERIA. 
Road  transportation  is  the  most used  mode  of  transportation  in  Nigeria as  other 
alternatives  like  rail,  air  or  water  transportation  are  limited  or  not  easily 
accessible in many parts of the country. 
Nigeria  has  the  largest  road  network  in  West  Africa  with  over  204,000  km  of 
paved and unpaved road networks. 
Over-reliance  on  road  transportation  has  led  to  an  increase  in  road  traffic 
crashes  and  fatalities  in  Nigeria.  Several  factors  which  include  overloading, 
reckless  driving,  inadequate  enforcement  of  traffic  laws  and  speeding  with  the 
later  as  the  most  prevalent  cause  compelled  the  need  for  installation  of  speed 
limiting device as a panacea to the incessant road traffic injuries and fatalities. 
A  speed  limiting  device  is  a  device  that  is  installed  in  vehicle  to  restrict  it 
maximum   speed.   It   is   designed   to   prevent   drivers   from   exceeding   a 
predetermined   speed   limit,   which   is   typically   set   by   the   manufacturer   or 
regulatory authorities. 
FRSC  as  an  agency  saddled  with  the  core  mandate  of  creating  safe  motoring 
environment  for  all  road  users,  commenced  sensitization  campaign  on  compulsory 
installation of speed limiting device in commercial vehicles in year 2012. 
In   May   2013   a   technical   Committee   was   constituted   comprising   of   some 
government  agencies;  SON,  NADDC,  NITT,  NSE  and  FRSC  with  the  aim  to  come 
up  with  a  draft  policy  on  standard  of  speed  limiting  device  to  be  adopted  in 
Nigeria. 
The draft policy document was reviewed and adopted on the 4th September, 2013 
and  subsequently  approved  by  Standard  Organization  of  Nigeria  (SON)  on  the 
28th May, 2014. 
After   several   deliberations   with  relevant   stakeholders   and   sensitization  of 
drivers and the general public, 1st April, 2016 was approved as commencement of 
nation-wide enforcement on the installation of speed limiting device by commercial 
vehicles. 
The benefits of speed limiting devices include; 
i. Increased safety,  
ii. Reduced fuel consumption,   

80 
 
iii. Reduced maintenance costs.  
iv. Reduce   wear   and   tear   on   the   vehicle's   engine,   brakes,   and   other 
components,  
v. Save money on repairs and maintenance. 
FRSC as a lead agency in road safety administration and Road traffic management 
is empowered to enforce Installation of speed limiting devices on vehicles through 
the following legal tools. 
i. FRSC Establishment Act, 2007 
ii. National Road Traffic Regulations, 2012 
iii. National Road Traffic (Amendment) Regulations, 2016 
FRSC  in  fulfilling  its  commitments  towards  minimising  road  traffic  injuries  most 
especially speed related crashes and fatalities, kick-started the process of policy 
implementation on Speed limiting device in 2012. 
The  Corps  started  with  engagement of  relevant stakeholders  and  constitution  of 
technical  committee  for  draft  of  policy  document  and  sensitization  campaign  in 
enlightening and educating drivers and other road users on the needs and benefits 
of installation of speed limiting device on vehicles. 
ADOPTION OF DRAFT POLICY DOCUMENT 
The  draft  policy  document  was  reviewed  and  adopted  by  a  larger  committee  on 
4th  September,  2013.  The  reviewed  document  was  accepted  and  approved  by 
Standard Organization of Nigeria (SON) Governing Council on the 28th May, 2014. 
This comprised of two parts. 
i. Part I: Installation requirement and, 
ii. Part II: Specification for system and component requirement. 
As  of  April,  2023  a  total  of  97  vendors  has  been  accredited  across  the  country 
for the installation of speed limiting devices Nation-wide. While from inception to 
April,  2023  a  total  of  173,698  speed  limiting  devices  have  been  installed  in 
vehicles across the country. 
CHALLENGES   FACING   IMPLEMENTATION   OF   SPEED   LIMITING   DEVICE 
POLICY. 

81 
 
i. Compromise  by  some  vendors  by  setting  speed  limiting  device  above  the 
recommended legal speed limit. 
ii. Drivers  tampering  with  the  devices  either  by  intentionally  damaging  the 
device or disconnecting it. 
iii. shortage   of   technical   expertise   and   trained   personnel   to   monitoring 
tampered speed limiting device installed in vehicles.  
iv. The cost of acquiring and installing speed limiting devices is also a challenge, 
especially  for  low-income  vehicle  owners  and  those  who  operate  in  rural  areas 
where there are limited resources. 
v. shortage  of  technical  expertise  and  trained  personnel  to  install,  maintain, 
and repair speed limiting devices. 
 
WHAT IS PRE-FITTED SPEED LIMITING DEVICE 
A  pre-fitted  or  factory-fitted  speed  limiting  device  refers  to  a  speed  limiting 
device that is installed in a vehicle during its production process. In other words, 
the  device  is  built  into  the  vehicle  by  the  manufacturer  before  it  is  sold  to  the 
customer. 
BENEFITS OF PRE-FITTED SPEED LIMITING DEVICE 
i. It  makes  it  difficult  or  impossible  for  drivers  to  tamper  with  the  speed 
limiting device. 
ii. By   installing   pre-fitted   devices,   vehicle   manufacturers   can   ensure 
compliance with regulations and avoid penalties for non-compliance. 
iii. It  reduces  chances  of  electrical  problem  related  to  installation  of  speed 
Limiting Device. 
iv. Vehicles  with  pre-fitted  Speed  limiting  devices  save  the  owners cost  of 
installation and maintenance. 
v. pre-fitted  speed  limiting  devices  can  help  reduce  maintenance  costs  and 
prolong the lifespan of the vehicle. 
 
PRE-FITTED SPEED LIMITER IMPLEMENTATION AGENCIES 

82 
 
Federal Road Safety Corps 
National Automotive Design and Development Council (NADDC) 
Standard Organization of Nigeria (SON) 
Nigeria Society of Engineers 
National Orientation Agency (NOA) 
Nigeria Customs Service (NCS) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
i. The  need  to  improve  monitoring  measure  for  discovering  tampered  speed 
limiting device in vehicles. 
ii. Provision   of   incentives   to   vehicle   manufacturers   to   encourage   the 
installation of pre-fitted speed limiting devices. like, low tax. 
iii. Government  to  make  policy  on  mandatory  installation  of  pre-fitted  speed 
limiting devices in imported or locally manufactured commercial vehicles. 
iv. To  ensure  the  effective  installation  and  maintenance  of  pre-fitted  speed 
limiting devices, there is a need for training and  capacity building for both FRSC 
personnel and vendors technicians. 
 
 
 
 
 