Nigeria Police Act 2020
Section: 5
Status: FOUND
Confidence: 90
Page start: 9
Page end: 39
OCR line start: 445
OCR line end: 2111
Reason: 

----- RECONSTRUCTED TEXT -----
5 of this Act, and for this purpose, the Inspector-General of Police shall: .
(a) facilitate access to legal support for suspects, accused persons or
detainees in police custody;
(b) ensure that police officers assigned to work under the relevant scheme
provide necessary assistance as may be required by legal counsel; and
(c) for the purposes of performing the functions under this section, submit
to the Attomey-General of the Federation and National Assembly an
annual report on how those responsibilities referred to under section 5
(2) of this Act are discharged.
(3) The Attorney-General of the Federation shall, after a. review of the annual report
received, send his findings and recommendations to the President and publish same in
his official website
(4) The Inspector-General of Police shall by order published in the Federal Government
Gazette make detailed provisions and specifications for the establishment and proper
working of the schemes or mechanisms under section 5 of this Act.
(5) The Inspector-General of Police shall, in performing his functions under this Act, obtain
inputs from the Deputy Inspectors-General and Assistant Inspectors: General of the
Zonal Commands on ‘the priority areas of policing for the Zones and incorporate
submissions from Commissioners of Police of the States to be included in the overall :
national strategic plan for the next succeeding financial year.
(6) The Inspector-General of Police may:
(a) re-engage a retired police officer for a period of two years; and :
(b) upon application by the retired police officer, re-engage him for i
another period of two years.
"49, (1) The Inspector-General of Police may delegate any of his powers under this Act to any Delegation of
police officer, as may be appropriate, and such powers may be exercised with respect to powers.
the matiers or class of matters specified or defined in the instrument of delegation.
|
(2) Guided by the principle of efficiency and effectiveness, and for ease of delegation of |
powers, the Inspector-General of Police shall devolve powers to Zonal, States, Area i
omumands, Divisions and Police Posts to ensure quick response to safety and security
needs. |
PART IV- APPOINTMENT AND FUNCTIONS ETC. OF THE DEPUTY INSPECTOR-
GENERAL OF. POLICE, ASSISTANT INSPECTORS-GENERAL OF _ POLICE,
COMMISSIONERS OF POLICE AND OTHER PERSONS INTO THE POLICE FORCE
11. (1) The Police Service Commission, on the recommendation of the Inspector-General of Appointment
Police shall appoint for the Police Force such numbers of Deputy Inspectors-General of and duties of the
Police and’such numbers of Assistant Inspectors-General of] Police as are required for Deputy
the efficient performance of the functions of the Police Force. papector
feNeral 0:
i) ; ; . Police and
(2) A person appointed under subsection (1) shall: Assistant
(a) hold office until promotion, retirement or removal by the Police sector
Service Commission on account of gross misconduct or incapacity to Police
perform the functions of his office after following due process; and ,
(b) perform such functions and responsibilities and exercise such powers
as are assigned to him by the Inspector-General of Police.
===== PAGE 10 =====
" (3) The most senior Deputy Tnspector- General of Police shall, in the absence from office |
‘ of the Inspector-General of Police, act on behalf of the Inspector-General of Police in. '
performing any of the functions and discharging the duties of the Inspector-General of
olice under this Act or under any law or in respect of any function as may be
delegated by the Inspector-General of Police.
(4) On resumption of duty by the Inspector-General of Police, the said Deputy Inspector:
General of Police shall furnish reports, in such form oz details as the Inspector-General
of Police may specify, of all matters dealt with OF the Deputy Inspector-General of
Police in the absence of the Inspector-General of Police from office.
12, (1) The Police Service Commission shall appoint such numbers of Commissioners of Appointment of
Police as are required for the efficient performance of the functions of the Police Force. Commissioners
oT Police,
(2) The Police Service Commission shall, from among the Commissioners of Police
appointed under subsection (1), assign a Commissioner of Police to a State or to the
Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.
(3) The Commissioners of Police not assigned under subsection may be deployed by the
Inspector-General of Police to head departments and such other operational units of the
Police Force,
(4) The Police Service Commission or Inspector-General of Police, in assigning or
deploying, as the case may be, Commissioners of Police under this section to State
commands, departments or unit, shall reflect the principle of federal character as
provided in the Constitution and under the relevant Act.
(5) A person appointed under subsection (1) shall hold office until promotion, |
redeployment, retirement or removal by the Police Service Commission on account of i
gross misconduct or incapacity to perform the functions of his office as the case maybe. |
|
13. (1) Subject to the provisions this Act, the Commissioner of Police of a State or the Federal Functions of
Capital Territory shall: Commissioners |
of Police of i
(a) have command and control over the Police in the State he is assigned States. |
to;
(b) exercise powers and perform the functions necessary to give effect to |
sections 4 of this Act; and i
(c) perform any duty delegated to him by the Inspector-General of Police.
14, The Police Service Commission shall appoint such other persons to offices in the Police Appointment of
Force as are required for the effective and efficient performance of the functions of the other persons.
Police Force on such terms and conditions as maybe prescribed by the Police Service
Commission.
15, (1) Persons appointed to offices under this Part are entitled to such pensions, gratuities and Pensions and
othér retirement benefits as are prescribed under the Pension Retorm Act. gratuities.
Q) Nothing in this Act prevents the appointment of a person to any office on terms which’ A°tNe- 4 2014.
prgelu e the grant of a pension, gratuity or other retirement benefits in respect of that
office.
16. | (1) The Inspector-General of Police may make standing orders relating to operational Standing orders.
control of the Police.
(2) Such standing orders are binding upon all police officers and shall be published in the
Federal Government Gazette and in one national daily.
(3) The Police Service Commission may, subject to the provisions of this Act, make
standing orders relating to:
===== PAGE 11 =====
|
, |
- |
|
i
; (a) the appointment, promotion and disciplinary control, including
dismissal of persons appointed by it into the Police Force; and
(b) appeals against dismissal or other disciplinary measures.
(4) The standing orders made under subsection (1) are binding on all persons appointed by
the Police Service Commission and shall be published in the Federal Government
Gazette.
PART V - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
17, A person appointed as a member of the Police Force shall, prior to the commencement of Oath to be taken
duties, subscribe to the official oath, the police oath and the oath of allegiance under the by officers on
Oaths Act. appointment.
Cap. Ol, LFN,
2004,
18. (1) The’ responsibility for the recruitment of recruit constables into the Nigeria Police Reman
Force and recruit cadets into the Nigeria Police Academy shall be the duty of the. Reoruitment
Inspector-General of Police. Committee.
(2) For the purpose of subsection (1), there shall be the Nigeria Police Recruitment |
Comunittee (in this Act referred to as "the Police Recruitment Committee"). |
(3) The Police Recruitment Committee is responsible for the recruitment of recruit
constables into the Nigeria Police Force. |
(4) The Police Recruitment Committee shal! consist of:
|
|
(a) the Inspector-General of Police as Chairman;
(b) ali the serving Deputy Inspectors-General of Police;
(c) the Force Secretary;
(d) the Commandant of Staff College Jos; ‘
(e) the Commandant of Police Academy Wudil, Kano;
(f) arepresentative each of the Police Colleges; and
(g) the officer in-charge of the legal section of the Nigeria Police Force. !
(5) The recruitment of recruit constables into the Nigeria Police Force shall be of national
spread across each State of the Federation. |
(6) The members of the Police Recruitment Committee shall have power to delegate
officers, not below the rank of Chief Superintendent of Police, to represent them at any
===== PAGE 12 =====
; meeting or recruitment exercise.
(7) The decision of the Police Recruitment Committee is final on any matter concerning
the recruitment of recruit constables into the Nigeria Police Force.
(8) Every police officer shall, on recruitment or appointment, serve in the Nigeria Police
Force for a period of 35 years or until he attains the age of 60 years, whichever is
earlier.
(9) Professionals from the relevant fields, including engineering, medicine, pathology,
aviation, law, psychology, accountancy and forensic science, shall:
(a) be appointed into the Nigeria Police Force as specialists; and
(b) practise their professions and use their expertise in the
advancement of the objectives of the Police Force.
(10) All candidates wishing to be recruited or appointed into the Nigeria Police Force
shall undergo psychological and other medical evaluations as may be required as part
of the recruitment or appointment process to ascertain their character and suitability for |
the job. |
i
(11) Within the period of recruitment or appointment, every police officer shall undergo |
specialised training in any professional field relevant to policing and law enforcement. \
|
19, C) The Inspector-General of Police shall ensure that all police officers undergo periodic Training
training and re-training in: programmes.
(a) basic policing, ethics, code of conduct and standard operating :
procedures;
(b) crime detection and law enforcement;
(c) investigation and gathering of evidence; |
(d) effective nationwide citizen engagement; |
(e) human rights, gender issues, public relations and other emerging
issues;
(f) democratic policing and emotional intelligence; and
(g) prosecution and defence;
(2) The Inspector-General of Police, in consultation with the Ministry and Police Service
Commission, is responsible for the revision of the training, duration and the content of
the training of police officers, at least once in every five years.
(3) The Inspector-General of Police shall ensure that training programmes are made
available to all police officers, irrespective of gender and for all other staff or
employees charged with responsibilities for discharging the duties and responsibilities
===== PAGE 13 =====
: of the Police Force.
‘ (4) All police officers shail undergo periodic training and retraining in basic policing and
law enforcement courses as well as specialized courses relevant to law enforcement.
20, The police officer shall not be paid salary below what is payable to officers in other Remuneration.
security agencies. .
21. (1) Any private organisation or government department who desires to avail itself of the Appointment of
services of supernumerary police for the Riotection of property owned or controlled by supernumerary
it may make application to the Inspector-General of Police: ; police officers
‘0 protec
(a) stating the nature and situation of the property in question; and property.
(b) giving such other particulars as the Inspector-General of Police may
require,
(2) On an application under subsection (1), the Inspector-General of Police may, with the
approval of the Police Service Commission, direct the appropriate authority to appoint,
as supernumerary police officers in the Police Force, such number of persons as the
Inspector-General of Police thinks appropriate for the protection of the property to |
which the application relates. |
(3) Every supernumerary police officer appointed under this section and sections 22 and
3: |
;
}
(a) is appointed in respect of the area of the Police Zonal, State, Area or |
Divisional Commands in which the personnel and property which he is i
to protect are located; |
(b) is employed exclusively on duties connected with the protection,
administration and maintenance of that property or premises; i
(c) shall, in the Police area in respect of which he is appointed and in any
police area adjacent thereto, have the powers, privileges and immunities |
of a police officer; and |
(d) shall be: |
(i) amember of the Police Force for all purposes, and
Gi) subject to the provisions of this Act, particularly the provisions |
relating to discipline. |
(4) Where any supernumerary police officer is appointed, the private or government \
department availing itself of the services of that officer shall pay:.
(a) all entitlements, including salary and allowances to the officer
monthly;
(b) on the enlistment of the officer, the full cost of the officer's uniform
and accoutrements, including ceremonial dresses, which:
(i) is the same as the police general duty, and
_. (ii) shall be paid to the Police in a designated account approved by the |
Inspector-General of Police.
(5) Where the private or government department availing itself of the services of any
supernumerary police officer desires the services of that officer to be discontinued, the
private or government department shall give at least two months’ notice in writing to
===== PAGE 14 =====
; that effect to the Inspector-General of Police who shall give approval to such request
for implementation, and all benefits of the officer shall be paid within one month of his
release.
(6) All uniforms shall be supplied by the Police Force Quarter Master.
(7) The supernumerary police shall be a unit of the Police Force. :
22, The appropriate authority may, at the request of any senior police officer, appoint any Appointment of
person as a supernumerary police officer at an appropriate level in the Police Force for the superaumerary
administration or maintenance of premises occupied or used for the Purposes of the Police police officers
Force, but shall not do so in any particular case unless he is satisfie that it is necessary in for employment
the interest of security or discipline that the persons discharging the duties in question are 7
subject to the provisions of this Act relating to discipline. administrative
duties on police
premises,
23, (1) If, at any time, the Inspector-General of Police, with the consent of the Police Appointment of
Service Commission, is satisfied, as regards any police area, that it is necessary supemumeraty
in the public interest for supernumerary police officers to be employed in that police officers
area, he may authorise the appropriate authority to appoint persons as where necessary
supernumerary police officers in the Police Force in accordance with the in the public
authorisation. interest,
(2) Every authorisation under this section shall be in writing and shall specify the police |
area to which it relates and the maximum number of supernumerary police officers who |
may be appointed under that authorisation. |
(3) Every supernumerary police officer appointed by an authorisation given under this
section shall not: .
(a) bear arms; and {
(b) be covered by the provisions relating to pension as stipulated in section
15 of this Act. i
24, (1) The appropriate authority may, at the request of the Inspector-General of Police or Appointment of
Commissioner of Police of a State, appoint any person as a supernumerary police supernumerary |
officer in the Police Force for attachment as an orderly to: police officers |
for attachment
(a) a Minister; as orderlies,
(b) a Commissioner of the Government of a State; or |
(c) a police officer of, or above, the rank of Assistant Commissioner. |
1
(2 Every supernumerary police officer appointed under this section, shall:
(a) be employed exclusively on duties connected with the activities of the |
person to whom he is attached,
(b) while so employed, have, throughout Nigeria, the powers, privileges
_. and immunities of a police officer; |
(c) may be trained to bear fire arms with the approval of the Inspector |
General of Police; |
(d) subject to the restriction imposed by paragraph (a) and section 20 of
this Act, shall be a member of the Force for all purposes and shall be
subject to the provisions of this Act, particularly the provisions
relating to discipline.
===== PAGE 15 =====
; |
25. e3) Every supernumerary police officer is, on appointment, enlisted to serve in the Police Provisions |
Force from month to month, and a supernumerary police officer may, at any time, supplementary |
resign his appointment by giving one month's notice in that behalf to his employer and ‘0 sections 21 to |
senior police officer in charge of the police area in respect of which he is appointed, 23.
and his appointment may be determined by the appropriate authority on:
(a) one month's notice in that behalf, or
(b) on payment of one month's pay instead of such notice.
(2) The ranks to which supernumerary police officers may be appointed shall be prescribed
by the Inspector-General of Police with the consent of the Police Service Commission,
but shall not exceed the rank of Commissioner of Police throughout his life time.
(3) There shall only be one Supernumerary Commissioner of Police at a time in the
Federation.
(4) The badges of ranks of the supernumerary police shall be the same as that worn by
general duty or regular police.
(5) A supernumerary police officer has no claim on the Police Reward Fund, and, without
prejudice to any liability under the Employee's Compensation Act, to be paid ActNo. 13,
: compensation to or in respect of any person by virtue of his employment as a 2010
supernumerary police officer, a person's service as such shall not render him or any
other person eligible for any pension, gratuity or annual allowance under this Act or the
Pensions Reform Act. ; Act No. 4, 2014,
PART VI- FINANCIAL PROVISIONS |
26, (1) There is established and maintained for the Police Force a fund (in this Act referred to Funding of the |
as “the General Fund’’) into which shall be paid: Police Force. |
(a) budgetary allocations for capital and recurrent expenditure, for
members of the Police Force and the Traffic Warden_ Service |
established under this Act and the other staff of the Police Force, as
may be appropriated by an Act of the National Assembly for the Police
oree;
(b) such contributions as may be made available to the Police Force, for |
the purposes of this Act, by the State Governments and the Federal |
Capital Territory, Abuja;
(c) aid and assistance from international bilateral and multilateral
organisations provided that the purpose for the aid or assistance does |
not conflict with the objectives of this Act; |
(d) all sums of money accruing to the Police Force by way of grants-in- |
aid, gifts, testamentary dispositions, endowments and contributions
from any other source; .
(e) all money generated by the Police Force in the course of its
operations, including two-thirds of fees paid:
(i) by members of the public in respect of extracts from police
reports, and
(ii) in accordance with standing orders for services of police officers
who would otherwise be off duty, and
(f) any other financial resource that may be vested in or accrue to the
===== PAGE 16 =====
ne Police Force in the course of performing its functions under this Act
, or any other law.
(2) A State Government or the Federal Capital Territory, as the case may be, shall:
(a) keep records of all contributions made; and
(b) specify the purpose for which a contribution is made under subsection
(1) @). |
27, (1) The Police Force shall, from time to time, apply the money accruing in the General Expenditures by |
Fund to: the Police :
Force.
(a) the cost of administration and operations of the Police Force; :
(b) the payment of salaries, allowances, expenses and other benefits of the
memibers of the Police Force and Warden Service established under this |
Act and the other staff of the Police Force; i
(c) the payment of pensions and other retirement benefits under any law; |
. i
(d) the costs of acquisition and upkeep of premises belonging to the Police |
Force and any other capital expenditure of the Police Force;
t
(e) all costs connected with or incidental to the operations of the |
Community Policing Commitiees and Sub-Committee Forums and
Boards established under Part XIV of this Act \
|
(® the investments, maintenance of utilities, training, research and similar |
activities; and
(g) any other payment for anything incidental to the provisions of this
section or any other function of the Police Force under this Act. |
(2) Any contribution made by a State Government or the Federal Capital Territory under |
section 26 (1) (b) or any other contribution in respect of which a purpose was specified |
shall be used by the Police Force for the purpose specified. |
29. (1) The Police’ Force shall, not later than 30" September of each year, submit to the Estimates. |
National Assembly, through the Minister, estimates of its income and expenditure for |
the next succeeding financial year. |
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), the Police Force may, where
necessary due to unforeseen circumstances, submit supplementary or | adjusted
statements of estimated income and expenditure to the Minister for submission to the
National Assembly. |
(3) The Police Force shall, in preparing its estimates under this section, obtain inputs from |
the Force Headquarters, Zonal Headquarters, State Commands, Area Commands and
Divisional Commands on their budgetary needs based on the annual policing plans for |
the various policing formations to ‘be included in the overall estimates for the Police
Force for the next succeeding financial year. |
29, (1) The Police Force shall: Accounts and |
audit.
(a) Keep, proper records and accounts of the income and expenditures of |
the Police Force; and :
(b) prepare a statement of account in respect of each financial year.
(2) The Police Force shall, within the first four months of each financial year, submit for
auditing, the accounts of the Police Force to auditors appointed by the Police Force
from the list and in accordance with guidelines approved by the Auditor-General for
===== PAGE 17 =====
i
ee |
; the Federation.
(3) The audited accounts of the Police Force and the Auditor-General’s report on the
accounts shall be forwarded to the National Assembly by the Auditor~General }
annually. |
30, (1) The Police Force shall, not later than 30" June of each financial year, submit, to the Annual report.
Minister, in respect of the preceding financial year, an annual report on the activities of
the Police Force in such form as the Minister may direct.
(2) The report under subsection (1) shall include:
(a) detailed information with regards to the activities and expenditures of
the Police Force utilised in the carrying out of its policing plan;
(b) a copy of the audited accounts of the Police Force for that year
together with the Auditor-General’s report on the accounts,
(c) information and description of all contributions made to the Police
Force under section 26 (1) (b), including contributions other than
cash; and
(d) such other information as the Minister may request.
(3) The Police Force shall, from time to time, provide the Police Council, Police Service
Commission and Minister with such information relating to the affairs of the Police |
Force as they may request.
PART VII- POWERS OF POLICE OFFICERS |
A. Investigation and Arrest |
31. Where an alleged offence is reported to the Police, or a person is brought to the police Investigation of
station, on, the allegation of committing an offence, the Police shall investigate the an allegation by
allegation in accordance with due process and report its finding to the Attorney-General of the Police.
» the Federation or of a State, as the case may be, for legal advice. |
32. (1) A suspect or defendant alleged or charged with committing an offence established by an Arrest |
Act of the National Assembly or under any other law shall be arrested, investigated and generally. |
tried or dealt with according to the provisions of this Act, except otherwise provided j
under this Act. |
(2) A person shall not be arrested merely on a civil wrong or breach of contract. |
(3) A suspect shall be brought before the court as prescribed by this Act or any other |
written law or otherwise released conditionally or unconditionally. |
33, In making an arrest, the police officer or other persons making the arrest shall actually Mode of arrest.
touch or confine the body of the suspect, unless there is a submission to the custody by
word or action.
34, A suspect or defendant may not be handcuffed, bound or subjected to restraint except: No unnecessary
restraint,
(a) there is reasonable apprehension of violence or an attempt to escape; |
(b) the restraint is considered necessary for the safety of the suspect or
defendant; or
(c) by order of a court.
35, (1) Except when the suspect is in the actual course of committing an offence or is pursued Notification of
: immediately after the commission of an offence or has escaped from lawful custody, cause of arrest
: the police officer or other person making the arrest shall inform the suspect and rights of
===== PAGE 18 =====
; immediately of the reason for the arrest. suspect.
(2) The police officer, the person making the arrest or the police officer in charge ofa
police station shall inform the suspect of his rights to:
(a) remain silent or avoid answering any question until after consultation
with a legal practitioner or any other person of his own choice;
(b) consult a legal practitioner of his choice before making, endorsing or ,
writing any statement or answering any question put to him after
_. arrest; and :
(c) free legal representation by the Legal Aid Council of Nigeria or other
organisations, where applicable. :
(3) The authority having custody of the suspect shall notify the next-of-kin or relative of
the suspect of the arrest at no cost to the suspect.
36, Aperson shall not be arrested in place of a suspect. Asrest in lieu |
prohibited. |
37, (1) Asuspect shall:
Humane
(a) be accorded humane treatment, having regard to his right to the dignity treatmeat of
of his person; and arrested suspect. |
(b) not be subjected to any form of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading |
treatment. |
i
3g, (1) A police officer may, without an order of a court and without a warrant, arrest a Arrest by police |
suspect: officer without |
warrant. |
(a) whom he suspects on reasonable grounds of having committed an
_ offence against a law in Nigeria or against the law of any ,other :
: country, unless the law creating the offence provides that the suspect |
: cannot be arrested without a warrant; '
. |
(b) who commits an offence in his presence;
(c) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or |
who has escaped or attempts to escape from lawful custody;
(d) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be i
suspected to be stolen property or who may reasonably be suspected of |
having committed an offence with reference to the thing; |
(e) whom he suspects on reasonable grounds of being a deserter from any |
of the armed forces of Nigeria; :
(f) whom he suspects on reasonable grounds of having been involved in an
act committed at a place outside Nigeria which, if committed in
Nigeria, would have been punished as an offence, and for which he is,
under a law in force in Nigeria, liable to be apprehended and detained
in Nigeria;
(g) having in his possession without lawful excuse, the burden of proof |
which excuse shall lic on the person, any implement of housebreaking, |
car theft, firearm or any offensive or dangerous weapon, ; |
, (h) whom he has reasonable cause to believe a warrant of arrest has been
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction in Nigeria; .
===== PAGE 19 =====
: (i) found in Nigeria taking Precautions to. conceal his presence in
circumstances, which afford reason to believe that he is taking such
precautions with a view to committing an offence;
(j) whom he is directed to arrest by a judge or magistrate.
(k) whom he reasonably suspects to be planning to commit an offence for
which the police officer may arrest without a warrant, if it appears to
him that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented; :
or
(3) required to appear by a public summons issued under this Act or any
other Act.
(m) to protect a child or other vulnerable person from the suspect in
question;
(n) to prevent the suspect in question from:
(i) causing physical injury to himself or any other person,
Gi) suffering from physical injury,
(iii) causing loss of or damage to property;
(iv) committing an offence against public decency where members of
the public going about their normal business cannot reasonably be
expected to avoid the person in question, or
(v) causing an unlawful obstruction of the highway; and :
(2) No person shall be arrested without warrant except as provided in subsection (1).
(3) The authority given to a police officer to arrest a suspect who commits an offence in his
presence is exercisable in respect of offences committed in the officer’s presence
notwithstanding that the Act creating the offence provides that the suspect cannot be
arrested without a warrant.
39, A private person may arrest a suspect in Nigeria who in his presence commits an offence, Arrest without
or whom he reasonably suspects of having committed an offence for which the police is warrant by
entitled to arrest without a warrant. private person.
40, (1) A private person who arrests a suspect shall immediately hand over the suspect so Handingoverof
arrested to a police officer or, in the absence ofa police officer, shall take the suspect to an arrested i
the nearest police station, and the police officer shall make a note of the name, address suspect by
and other particulars of the private person making the arrest. private person. |
(2) Where there is reason to believe that the arrested suspect comes under subsection (1), a
police officer shall re-arrest him and if there is no sufficient reason to believe that the
suspect has committed an offence, he shall be released immediately.
(3) Where there is reason to believe that the suspect has committed an offence, and he
refuses, on the demand of a police officer, to give his name and address, or gives a |
name or address which the police officer reasonably believes to be false, the provisions |
of section 61 of this Act shall apply.
(4) Where a suspect so arrested by a private person is handed over to a police officer or an
official of an agency authorised by law to make arrests, the police officer or official
shall take note of the name, residential address and other particulars of the private
person making the arrest, and the date, time and other circumstances of the arrest, and :
where the arrested suspect is taken to the police station or to the agency, the officer
===== PAGE 20 =====
|
: i
|
. i
. shall make the entries in the crime diary.
, (5) The police officer or official to whom the arrested suspect is handed over by the private
person shall obtain from the private person who made the arrest a formal witness
statement setting out the facts and circumstances of the arrest. .
(6) The provisions of section 46 of this Act do not apply to this section unless the suspect
arrested and handed over has been re-arrested in accordance with subsection (2),
4{, A judge or magistrate may arrest or direct the arrest of a suspect committing an offence in Arrest for
his presence and shall hand him over to a police officer who shall proceed to take necessary offence
action. committed in
presence ofa
judge or
magistrate.
42, A person is bound to assist a judge, magistrate or police officer or other person reasonably When public is
demanding his aid in arresting or preventing the escape of a suspect whom the judge, bound to assist
magistrate, police officer or other person is authorised to arrest. in arrest,
43, (lA suspect who is arrested, whether with or without a warrant, shall be taken Arrested suspect
. immediately to a police station, or other place for the reception of suspect, and shall be to be taken |
promptly informed of the allegation against him in the language he understands. immediately to
police station.
(2) A person who has the custody of an arrested suspect shall give the suspect reasonable
facilities for obtaining legal advice, access to communication for taking steps to
furnish bail, and otherwise making arrangements for his defence or release.
(3) Notwithstanding the provision of subsection (2), any communication or legal advice i
shall be done or given in the presence of an officer who has custody of the arrested |
suspect. . |
|
AA (1) Where a suspect is arrested, whether with or without a warrant, and taken to a police Recording of
station or any other agency effecting the arrest, the Police officer making the arrest or arrests. |
. the officer in charge shall cause to be taken imme iately, in the prescribed form, the }
following record of the suspect arrested: '
(a) the alleged offence; . |
(b) the date and circumstances of his arrest; |
(c) his full name, occupation and residential address; and
(d) for the purpose of identification:
@) his height,
i) his photograph,
(ii) his full fingerprint impressions, or : ;
- (iv) such other means of his identification. ,
(2) The process of recording in subsection (1) shall be concluded within a reasonable time
of the arrest of the suspect, but not exceeding 48 hours.
(3) Any further action in respect of the suspect arrested under subsection (1) shall be
entered in the record of arrests. |
(4) Where a suspect who is arrested, with or without a warrant, volunteers to make a j
confessional statement, the police officer shall ensure that the making and taking of the
statement shall be in writing and may be recorded electronically on a retrievable video
or audio visual means.
===== PAGE 21 =====
|
: (5) Notwithstanding the provision of subsection (4), an oral confession of arrested suspect
: is admissible in evidence.
45, A police officer or any other person authorised to make an arrest may break out of a house Power to break
or place in order to liberate himself or any other person who, having lawfully entered for out of a house
the purpose of making an arrest, is detained in the house or place. or place for the
purpose 0
liberation.
46, (IA police officer making an arrest or to whom a private person hands over the suspect, Inventory of
shall immediately recor information about the arrested suspect and an inventory of all property of
items or property recovered from the suspect. arrested suspect.
(2) An inventory recorded under subsection (1) shall be duly signed by the police officer
and the arrested suspect, but the failure of the arrested suspect to sign the inventory does
not invalidate it.
(3) The arrested suspect, his legal practitioner or such other person, as the arrested suspect
may direct, shall be given a copy of the inventory. |
(4) Where any property has been taken under this section from an arrested suspect, a police |
officer may, upon request by either the owner of the property or parties having interest |
in the property, release such property on bond pending the arraignment of the arrested
suspect before a court. :
(5) Where a police officer refuses to release the property to the owner or any pessoa having |
interest in the property under subsection (4), the police officer shall imme jately make a ;
report to the court of the fact of the property taken from the arrested suspect and the |
particulars of the property.
(6) The court to which a report is made under subsection (5), may, if it is of the opinion that
the property or any portion of it can be returned in the interest of jestice to the safe '
custody of the owner or person having interest in the property, direct that the property or '
any portion of it be returned to the owner or to such person having interest in the '
property. :
(7) Where any property has been taken from a suspect under this section, and the suspect is |
not charged before a court but is released on the ground that there is no sufficient reason |
to believe that he has committed an offence, any property so taken from the suspect shall |
be returned to him, provided the property is neither connected to nor a proceed of an
offence. |
AT, (1) The Inspector-General of Police and head of every agency authorised by law to make Quarterly report |
arrests shall remit quarterly to the Attorney-General of the Federation a’record of all of arrests to the |
arrests made with or without warrant in relation to Federal offences within Nigeria. quem |
eneral,
(2) The Commissioner of Police of a State and the head of every agency authorised by law
to make arrest within a State shall remit, quarierly to the Attorney-General of that State
a record of all arrests made with or without warrant in relation to State offences or
arrests within the State.
(3) The report shall contain the full particulars of arrested suspects as prescribed under
section 44 of this Act.
(4) A register of arrests containing the particulars prescribed under section 44 of this Act
shall be kept in the prescribed form at every police station or agency authorised by law
to make arrests, and every arrest, whether made with or without warrant, within the
local limits of the police station or agency, or within the Federal Capital Territory,
Abuja, shall be entered accordingly by the officer in charge of the police station or
official in charge of the agency as soon as the arrested suspect is brought to the station
or agency.
===== PAGE 22 =====
, (5) The Attorney-General of the Federation shall establish an electronic and manual |
database of all records of arrests at the Federal and State level. |
B. Search |
48. (1) A police officer may seize and retain anything for which a search has been authorised. Power to search.
(2) In every case in which property is seized under this section, the person on, whose |
premises it was at the time of seizure or the person from whom it was taken, if other
than the person on whose Bremises it was, may be summoned or arrested and brought
before a court to account for his possession of the property, and the court shall make
such order on the disposal of the property and may award costs as the justice of the
case may require.
(3) An authority under subsection (2) may only be given when the premises to be searched
are, or within the preceding twelve months have been, in the occupation of any person
who: has been convicted of receiving stolen property or of harbouring thieves, or of
any offence involving fraud or dishonesty, anc punishable by imprisonment.
(4) While searching the premises, a police officer shall not violate'the human rights of ,
persons found in the premises that is being searched. |
49, (1) A police officer may exercise the power to stop and search in any: Power to stop |
and search,
(a) place the public or any section of the public has access, on payment or
otherwise, as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission; or
(b) other place to which the public has ready access at the time when he
proposes to exercise the power but which is not a private residence. |
(2) A Police officer may detain and search any person or vehicle where: |
(a) reasonable grounds for suspicion exist that the person being suspected
is having in his possession; or conveying in any manner anything :
which he has reason to believe to have been stolen or otherwise
unlawfully obtained; i
(b) reasonable grounds for suspicion exist that such person or vehicle is |
carrying an unlawful article; . |
(c) reasonable grounds for suspicion that incidents involving serious
violence may take place within a locality;
(d) information has been received as to a description of an article being
carried or of a suspected offender; and
(e) a person is carrying a certain type of article at an unusual time or in a
place where a number of burglaries or thefts are known to have taken
place recently. :
(3) If, in the course of a search, a police officer discovers an article which he has
reasonable grounds for suspecting to be a stolen or prohibited article, he may seize if.
(4) An article is prohibited for the purposes of this Part if it is:
(a) an offensive weapon; or
(b) an article:
(i) made or adapted for use in the course of or in connection with an
offence to which this section refer, or
(ii) intended by the person having it for use by him or by some other
===== PAGE 23 =====
, person. |
|
(5) The offences to which subsection (4)(b)@) applies are:
(a) burglary;
(b) theft; and
(c) offences related to receiving stolen property or of harbouring thieves,
or of any offence involving ‘fraud or dishonesty.
(6) In this Part ‘’ offensive weapon" means any article: .
(a) made or adapted for use for causing injury to persons; or
(b) intended by the person having it for use by him or by some other
person.
50. (1) Where a police officer is exercising the powers under section 51 of this Act he shall, Action before a
before carrying out the search, question the person about his behaviour or his presence _ search takes
in circumstances which gave rise to the suspicion. place.
(2) If the person to be searched has a satisfactory explanation which makes a search
unnecessary or other circumstances come to the attention of the police officer that
make the search unnecessary, no search may take place.
(3) Before any search of a detained person or vehicle may take place, the officer shall give
the person to be searched or in charge of the vehicle:
|
(a) his name and the name of the police station to which he is attached;
(b) the object of the search; and |
|
|
|
(c) his grounds or authorisation for undertaking the search. |
(4) For.any police officer to exercise the power to stop and search, he shall be in uniform or
wear visibly a valid police identity card. \
51. (1) Reasonable effort shall be taken to minimise the embarrassment that a person or the General conduct |
person whose property is being searched may experience. of the search.
(2) The co-operation of the person to be searched shall be sought in every case. |
(3) A forcible search may be used as a last resort only if it has been established that the
person being searched is unwilling to co-operate or resists. |
i
(4) The length of time for which a parson ot vehicle may be detained for a search depends i
on the circumstances, but this shall be within a reasonable time. -
(5) Searches in public shall be restricted to superficial examination of outer clothing.
(6) Where it is considered necessary to conduct a more thorough search that requires a |
person to take off his cloth or headgear, it:
(a) shall be done out of public view and by an officer of the same sex with
the person being searched; and
(b) may not be made in the presence of anyone of the opposite sex unless
the person being searched requests it. : |
===== PAGE 24 =====
52, (1) Where a suspect is arrested by a police officer or a private person, the police officer Search of
making the atrest or to whom the private person hands over the suspect may search the arrested suspect.
suspect if the police officer has reasonable grounds for believing that the arrested
person may present a danger to himself or others.
; (2) A police officer shall also have the power in any such case to search the arrested person
for anything:
(a) which he might use to assist him to escape from lawful custody; or
(b) which might be evidence relating to an offence.
(3) Where an arrested suspect is admitted to bail and bail is furnished, he shall not be .
seatched unless there are reasonable grounds for believing that he has on his person
any:
(a) stolen article,
(b) instrument of violence or poisonous substance; |
(c) tools connected with the kind of offence which he is alleged to have ;
committed; or
(d) other articles which may furnish evidence against him in regard to the
offence, which he is alleged to have committed.
(4) The power to search conferred under subsection Q). is only a power to search to the
extent that is reasonably required for the purpose of discovering anything or evidence.
(5) The powers conferred under this section to search a person are not to be construed as
authorising a police officer to require a person to remove any of his clothing in public. |
;
()A police officer may not search premises in the exercise of the power conferred under
subsection (2)(b) unless he has reasonable grounds for believing that there is evidence
for which a search is permitted under that paragraph on the premises. :
(7) A police officer shall place in safe custody all articles other than necessary wearing \
apparel found on the suspect.
53, (1) Subject to the provision of this section, an intimate search of a suspect may be carried Examination of |
out, if a police officer of at least the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police has arrested suspect. |
reasonable grounds for believing that the suspect in lawful custody:
(a) may have concealed on him anything which:
(i) could be used to cause physical injury to himself or others, and |
(ii) might so use while he is in police detention or in the custody of a |
court; or |
(b) that evidence of the offence alleged to have been committed can only
be gotten from examination of the suspect.
(2) An authorisation under subsection (1) may be given orally or in writing, and where an |
oral authorisation has been given, it shall be confirmed in writing as soon as practicable |
specifying the grounds for the intimate search. :
G)A police officer carrying out the intimate search shall inform the person who is to be
: subjected to the searc of the:
(a) purpose for.the search; and
===== PAGE 25 =====
. (b) authorisation and grounds for the search.
(4) An intimate search shall be by way of examination by a suitably qualified person.
(5) Where an officer of the rank of at least an Assistant Superintendent of Police considers |
it impracticable for an intimate search to be by way of examination by a suitably |
qualified person, the intimate search may be carried out by a police officer at the ra
of Sergeant.
6) An intimate search shall be carried out by a suitably qualified person or Sergeant of the
y Yq
same sex as the suspect.
(7) No intimate search may be carried out except:
(a) at a police station;
i
(b) at a hospital; or
(c) at some other place used for medical purposes.
(8) If an intimate search of a person is carried out, the custody record relating to him shall
state:
(a) the authorisation by virtue of which the search was carried out;
(b) the grounds for giving the authorisation;
i
(c) the fact that the appropriate consent was given; |
(d) which parts of his body were searched; and
(e) why they were searched.
(9) The information required to be recorded by subsection (8) shall be recorded as soon as i
practicable.after the completion of the search.
10) The custody officer at a police station may seize and retain anything which is found on
an intimate search of a person, or cause any such thing to be seized and retained if he: i
i
(a) believes that the person from whom it is seized may use it to:
i) cause physical injury to himself or any other person, |
(ii) damage property, |
(iti) interfere with evidence, or
(iv) assist him to escape; :
(b) has reasonable grounds for believing that it may be evidence relating to
_. an offence.
(11) Where anything is seized under this section, the suspect from whom it is seized shall ,
be told the reason for the seizure unless he is:
(a) violent or likely to become violent; or
(b) incapable of understanding what is said to him.
(12) Where the appropriate consent for an intimate search of any suspect was refused
without good cause, in any proceeding against that suspect for the offence for which
the search was required, the court, judge, magistrate or presiding judicial officer may
===== PAGE 26 =====
. draw such inferences from the refusal as it is considered proper.
(13) Every quarterly report submitted to the Attorney-General pursuant to section 47 of this |
Act shall contain information about searches under this section which have been
carried out during the period to which it relates. |
(14) The report on the searches referred to under subsection 13 shall include: |
(a) the total number of searches;
(b) the number of searches conducted by way of examination by a suitably
qualified person;
(c) the number of searches not conducted by a suitably qualified person,
but conducted in the presence of such a person; and
(d) the result of the searches carried out. ;
(15) In this section “suitably qualified person” means a registered:
(a) medical practitioner; or
(b) nurse.
54, The following shall not be grounds for reasonable suspicions; . Where
reasonable
(a) personal attributes, including a person’s colour, age, hairstyle or suspicion never
manner of dress; exist. i
|
(b) previous conviction for possession of an unlawful article; or |
|
(c) stereotyped images of certain persons or groups as more likely to be i
committing offences. |
. . |
55, (1) Where a person or police officer acting under a warrant of arrest or otherwise having Search of place
authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the suspect to be arrested has entered into entered by
or is within any house or place, the person residing in or being in charge of the house or suspect sought
place shall, on demand by the police officer or person acting for the police officer, to be arrested. |
allow him free access to the house or place and afford all reasonable facilities to search
the house or place for the suspect sought to be arrested. |
> (2) Where access to a house or place cannot be obtained under subsection (1), the person or |
police officer may enter the house or place and search it for the suspect to be arrested,
and in order to effect an entrance into the house or place, may break open any outer or |
inner door or window of any house or place, whether that of the suspect to be arrested
or of any other person or otherwise effect entry into such house or Pigces if after
notification of his authority and purpose, and demand of admittance duly made, he
cannot obtain admittance.
(3) Where the suspect to be arrested enters a house or place in the actual occupancy of
another person being a woman who by custom or réligious practice does not appear in
public, the person making the arrest shall:
(a) before entering the house or place, give notice to the woman that she is
at liberty to withdraw; and
(b) afford her every reasonable opportunity and facility for withdrawing,
and may then enter the house or place, but the notice shall not be
necessary where the person making the arrest is a woman.
56. (1) An officer who has carried out a search shall make a written record unless it is not Action after
practicable to do so, including situations where the number of persons to be searched is search is carried
arge or in situations involving public disorder. out.
===== PAGE 27 =====
|
!
. (2) The records shall be completed and signed by the officer and person being searched on
the spot and a copy to be given to the person being searched or the vehicle driver if it is
a vehicle.
(3) Subject to subsection (2), in case the search record is not available on the spot, the
officer that carried out the search shall advise the person searched or the driver of the
vehicle searched, of the police station the person may pick up the search record.
(4) A searched person may refuse to collect a search record that his signature is not
appended on.
(5) Where the person to be searched is unwilling to provide detailed information about
himself, the officer may not detain him, he shall be allowed-to go unless unlawful items
are found in his possession or in the vehicle searched.
57, (1) A search record shall be prepared in the prescribed Form to be known as a National — Search record,
Search Record Form. ;
(2) The following information must always be included in the National Search Record
Form:
(a) the name of the person searched or if, he withholds it, description of
the person;
(b) the date of birth of the person searched;
(c) anote of the person’s ethnic origin; |
(d) when a vehicle is searched, a description of the vehicle, including the |
registration number;
(e) the object of the search;
(f the ground for making the search;
(g) the date and time the search was made;
(h) the place where the search was made;
(i) the result of the search;
(a note of any injury or damage to property resulting from the search;
an |
(k) the identity of the officer making the search. |
58, (1) Asearch warrant is unlawful unless it complies with this section. Search warrant i
. safeguards,
(2) Where a police officer applies for any search warrant, it shall be his duty to state:
(a) the ground on which he makes the application,
(b) the law under which the warrant would be issued; |
(c) the premises to be searched; and |
(d) possibly the article or person to be searched. |
(3) An application for a warrant shall be made in writing under oath and supported by
necessary information.
(4) A warrant shal! authorise an entry on one occasion only.
===== PAGE 28 =====
!
‘. (5) A warrant shall:
(a) specify the:
({) name of the person who applies for it,
(ii) date on which it is issued,
(iii) law under which it is issued, and
(iv) premises to be searched; and
(b) identify, as practicable as possible, the article or person to be searched.
(6) Two copies of a warrant shall be made.
(7) The two copies shall be clearly certified as copies.
59, (1) A warrant to enter and search premises may be executed by any police officer. Execution of
search warrant.
(2) Such a warrant may authorise a person to accompany any police officer who is
executing it.
(3) A search warrant may be issued and executed at any time on any day, including a
Sunday or public holiday.
(4) Where the occupier of premises which is to be searched is present at the time when a |
police officer seeks to execute a warrant to enter and search, the police officer shall: |
(a) identify himself to the occupier and, if‘not in uniform, shall produce to
the occupier, his official identity card;
(b) produce. the warrant to the occupier; and
(c) supply the occupier with a copy.
(5) Where the occupier is not present, but some other person who appears to the police
officer to be in charge of the premises is present, subsection (4) shall take effect as if |
the occupier is present.
(6) Upon the execution of a warrant, a police officer shall make an endorsement on it
stating whether:
(a) the articles or persons sought were found; and
(b) any other articles were seized, other than articles which were sought.
C. Statements
60. (1) Where a suspect is arrested on allegation of having committed an offence, his statement Recording of
shall be taken, if he so wishes to make a statement. statement of
Suspect,
(2) The statement may be taken in the presence of a legal practitioner of his choice, or
where he has no legal practitioner of his choice, in the presence of an officer of the
Legal Aid Council of Nigeria or an official of a civil society organization or a justice |
of the peace or any other person of his choice, provided that the legal practitioner or
any other person mentioned in this subsection shall not interfere while the suspect is
making his statement, except for the purpose of discharging his duty as a legal
practitioner. ;
(3) Where a suspect does not understand or speak or write in the English language, an
===== PAGE 29 =====
" interpreter shall record and read over the statement to the suspect to his understanding
‘ and the suspect shall then endorse the statement as having been made by him, and the
interpreter shall attest to the making of the statement.
(4) The interpreter shall endorse his name, address, occupation, designation or other
particulars on the statement.
(5) The suspect referred to in subsection (1) shall also endorse the statement with his full
particulars.
61. (1) Where a suspect who, in the presence of a police officer, has committed or has been . Refusal to give
accused of committing an offence triable summarily, refuses, on demand of the police name and
officer, to give his name and residential address, or gives a name or residential address residence.
which the officer has reason to believe to be false, he may be arrested by the officer in
order that his name or residential address may be ascertained.
(2) Where the true name and residential address of the suspect have been ascertain, he shall
be released on his entry of recognisance with or without sureties to appear before a
magistrate if so required, but if the person is not resident in Nigeria, a surety or sureties
resident in Nigeria shall secure the recognizance.
(3) Where the true name and address of the suspect cannot be ascertained within 48 hours
from the time of arrest, or if he fails to execute a recognizance, or, where so required,
to furnish sufficient sureties, he shall immediately be brought before the nearest
magistrate having jurisdiction.
(4) Where the suspect on being brought before the court still refuses, the court may deal
with him as it will deal with an uncooperative witness under this Act.
D. Release of arrested suspect
62. (1) Where a suspect has been taken into police custody without a warrant for an offence Release on bail
other than an offence punishable with death, an officer in charge of a police station of suspect
shall inquire into the case and release the suspect arrested on bail subject to subsection | arrested without :
(2), and where it will not be practicable to bring the suspect before a court having © Walrant.
jurisdiction with respect to the offence alleged, within 24 hours after the arrest. |
(2) The police officer in charge of a police station shall release the suspect on bail on his |
entering into a recognisance with or without sureties for a reasonable amount of money :
to appear before the court or at the police station at the time and place named in the !
recognizance. |
(3) Where a suspect is taken into custody and it appears to the potice officer in charge of |
the station that the offence is of a capital nature, the arrested suspect shall be detained |
in custody, and the police officer may refer the matter to the Attorney-General of the !
Federation or of a State, as the case may, for legal advice and cause the suspect to be |
taken before a court having jurisdiction with respect to the offence within a reasonable
time. : |
63. (1) Where a suspect is taken into custody, and it appears to the police officer that the Power to release |
inquiry into the case cannot be completed immediately, he may discharge the suspect on bail before |
on his entering into a recognizance, with or without sureties for a reasonable amount, charge is
to appear at the police station and at such times as are named in the recognisance, secepted.
unless he previously receives notice in writing from the police officer in charge of that
police station that his attendance is not required.
(2) A recognisance under subsection (1) may be enforced as if it were a recognizance |
conditional for the appearance of the said suspect before a magistrate’s court or the |
place in which the police station named in the recognizance is situate.
64, (1) Where a suspect taken into custody in respect of a non-capital offence is not released on Remedy of |
bail after 24 hours, a court having jurisdiction with respect to the offence may be suspect detained
===== PAGE 30 =====
. notified by application on behalf of the suspect. in custody.
(2) The court shall order the production of the suspect detained and inquire into the
circumstances constituting the grounds of the detention and where it deems fit, admit
the suspect detained to bail.
(3) An application for bail under this section may be made orally or in writing.
E, Miscellaneous
65, Any summons lawfully issued by a court may be served by any police officer at any time Summons.
during the houts of daylight, which is between 6am to 6pm.
66, (1) Subject to the provisions of section 174 and 211 of the Constitution and section 106 of Powers to
the Administration of the Criminal Justice Act which relates to the powers of the prosecute.
Attorney-General of the Federation and of a State to institute, take over and continue or .
discontinue criminal proceedings against any person before any court of law in Nigeria, Cap. C23, LEN,
a police officer who is a legal practitioner, may Prosecute in person before any court 2004.
whether or not the information or complaint is laid in his name. Act No. 13,
2015,
(2) A police officer may, subject to the provisions of the relevant criminal procedure laws
in force at the Federal or State level, prosecute before the courts those offences which
non-qualified legal practitioners can prosecute.
(3) There shall be assigned to every Police Division at least one police officer: |
(a) who is qualified to practise as legal practitioner in accordance with the |
_ Legal Practitioners Act ; and : !
(b) whose responsibility is to promote human rights compliance by
officers of the Division. |
67. (1) There shall be established at the Nigeria Police, a Central Criminal Records Registry. Ceatral
Criminal i
(2} For the purposes of subsection (1), there shall be established at every State Police Records
Command a Criminal Records Registry which shall keep and transmit all records to Registry. i
the Central Criminal Records Registry. |
i
(3) The State or Federal Capital Territory Police Command, Abuja shall ensure that the |
decisions of the court in all criminal trials are transmitted to the Central Criminal
Records Registry within 30 days of the judgement. |
68. (1) A police officer shall take and record for the purposes of identification the Power to take |
measurements, photographs and fingerprint impression of all persons who may be in fingerprints. |
lawful custody.
(2) Where a person who has not previously been convicted of any criminal offence is i
discharged or acquitted by a court, all records relating to such measurements, i
photographs and Hngerprint impressions including the document of acquittal or i
discharge shall be stored in a retrievable form and handed over to such person upon |
request. : |
(3) A police officer shall apply to a court to compel any person in lawful custody, who |
refuses to submit to the taking and recording of his measurements, photographs or
fingerprint impressions, to submit himself.
(4) Subject to subsection (3), the court may authorise a police officer to take the
measurements, photographs and finger-print impressions of such person.
69, (1) An officer in charge of a police station or an official in charge of an agency authorised Police to report
to make arrest shall, on the last working day of every month, report to the nearest to supervising
magistrate the cases of all suspects arrested without warrant within the limits of their magistrates.
respective stations or agency whether the suspects have been admitted to bail or not.
===== PAGE 31 =====
‘ (2) The report shall contain the particulars of the suspects arrested as prescribed under
section 44 of this Act.
(3) The magistrate shall, on receipt of the reports, forward them to the Criminal Justice
Monitoring Committee which shall analyse the reports and advise the Attorney-
General of the Federation as to the trends of arrests, bail and related matters.
(4) The Attorney-General of the Federation shall, upon request by the National Human
Rights Commission, the Legal Aid Council of Nigeria or a non-governmental |
organisation, make the report available to them. |
(5) Where no report is made in accordance with subsection (1), the magistrate shall '
forward a report to the Chief Judge of the State and the Attorney-General of the State |
for appropriate remedial action.
(6) With respect to the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, the report referred to in subsection
0) shall be forwarded to the Chief Judge of the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja and
the Attorney-General of the Federation for remedial action.
70. (1) The chief magistrate, or where there is no chief magistrate within the police division, Chief magistrate
any magistrate designated by the Chief Judge for that purpose, shall, at least every to visit police
month, conduct an inspection of Police stations or other places of detention within his stations every
territorial jurisdiction other than the prison. month,
(2) During a visit, the magistrate may:
(a) call for, and inspect, the record of arrests;
|
(b) direct the arraignment of a suspect;
(c) where bail has been refused, grant bail to any suspect, where
appropriate, if the offence for which the suspect is held is within the i
jurisdiction of the magistrate. :
(3) An officer in charge of a police station or an official in charge of an agency authorised
to make an arrest shall make available to the visiting chief magistrate or designated
magistrate exercising his powers under subsection (1):
(a) the full record of arrest and record of bail;
{
. . soe . + . . i
(b) applications and decisions on bail made within the period; and |
(c) any other facility the magistrate requires to exercise his powers under
that subsection. |
(4) With respect to other Federal Government agencies authorised to make arrests, the High |
Court having jurisdiction shall visit such detention facilities for the purpose provided in |
this section. : i
= . + . . - : . |
(5) Where there is default by an officer in charge of a police station or an official in charge
of an agency authorised to make arrest to comply with the provisions of subsection (3),
the default shall be treated as a misconduct and shal! be dealt with in accordance with
the relevant police regulations under this Act, or under any other disciplinary procedure
prescribed by any provision regulating the conduct of the officer or official of the
agency.
PART VII[- WARRANTS
. General
71. Where under a law, there is power to arrest a suspect without warrant, a warrant for his authority to
arrest may be issued by the court. issue warrant.
===== PAGE 32 =====
72. (1) A warrant of arrest issued under this Act, unless the contrary is provided under any Form and
other law, shall: requisites of
warrant of
(a) bear the date of issue; acrest,
(b) contain all necessary particulars; and
(c) be signed by the issuing judge or magistrate.
(2) A warrant shall:
(a) state the offence or matter for which it is issued;
(b) name and describe the suspect to be arrested; and
(c) order the person to whom it is directed to arrest the suspect and bring
him before the court.
73, A warrant of arrest shall not be issued in the first instance in respect of any complaint or Warrant to be
statement unless the complaint or statement is on oath either by the complainant himself or issued on
by a material witness. : complaint only
ifon oath,
74, A warrant of arrest may be issued on any day, including a Sunday or public holiday. Warrant may be
issued on any
day. j
\
75, (1) A warrant of arrest may be directed to a police officer by name or to all police officers. Warrant, to i
whom directed i
(2) It is not necessary to make a warrant of arrest returnable at any particular time and a and duration.
warrant shall remain in force until it is executed or until a judge or a magistrate cancels :
It.
(3) Where a warrant of arrest has been executed and the suspect arrested has been released, ,
the warrant shall no longer be valid authority for re-arresting the suspect. ;
76, (1) A court issuing a warrant of arrest may, where its immediate execution is necessary and Warrant of
no police officer is immediately available, direct it to some other person or persons and arrest may in |
the person or persons shall execute the wacrant. exceptional |
cases be
Q)A person, when executing a warrant of arrest directed to him, shall have all the powers, directed to other
rights, privileges and protection given to or afforded by law to a police officer executing Persons. |
a warrant of arrest and shall conform with the requirement imposed by law on a police
officer. i
77. (1) A warrant of arrest may be executed on any day, including a Sunday or public holiday. ~ Execution of
warrant and |
(2) A warrant of arrest may be executed by any police officer at any time and in any place procedure.
in any State other than within the actual court room in which a court is sitting,
(3) The Police officer executing a warrant of arrest shall, before making the arrest, inform
the suspect to be arrested that there is a warrant for his arrest unless there is reasonable
cause for abstaining from giving the information on the ground that it is likely to \
occasion escape, resistance or rescue, |
(4) A suspect arrested on a warrant of arrest shall, subject to the provisions of the |
Constitution, sections 80 and 81 of this Act, be brought before the court that issued the |
warrant of arrest.
78. A warrant of arrest may be executed notwithstanding that it is not in the possession of the Power to arrest
person at the time of executing the warrant, but the warrant shall, on the demand by the without warrant
suspect, be shown to him within 24 hours. in possession.
===== PAGE 33 =====
79, (1) A court, on issuing a warrant for the arrest of a suspect in respect of a matter other than Court may
. an offence punishable with death, may, if it deems fit by endorsement on the warrant, direct
direct that the suspect named in the warrant to be released on bail on his entering into particulars of
such a recognizance for his appearance as may be required in the endorsement. cou tobe
taken on
(2) The endorsement shall specify: execution of
warrant.
(a) the number of sureties, if any;
(b) the amount in which they and the suspect named in the warrant are,
respectively, to be bound, or are to provide as cash security on the
request of the surety or suspect;
(c) the court before which the arrested suspect is to attend; and :
(d) the time at which the suspect is to attend, including an undertaking to
appear at a subsequent time as may be directed by any court before
which he may appear.
(3) Where an endorsement is made, the officer in charge of a police station to which on
arrest the suspect named in the warrant is brought, shall discharge him on his entering
into a recognizance, with or without sureties approved by that officer, in accordance
with the endorsement, condition for his appearance before the court and at the time
and place named in the recognisance.
(4) Where security is taken under this section, the officer who takes the recognizance shall
cause it to be forwarded to the court before which the suspect named in the |
recognizance is bound to appear.
go. (1) A warrant of arrest issued by a Federal High Court sitting anywhere in Nigeria may be Warrant issued |
executed in any part of Nigeria. by the Federal |
High Court. i
(2) A warrant issued under this section may be executed in accordance with section 75 of i
this Act.
81. Where a suspect in lawful custody escapes or is rescued, the person from whose custody Rearest of |
he escaped or is rescued or any other person may pursue and re-arrest him in any place in suspect |
Nigeria, escaping.
32. The provisions of sections 43 and 53 of this Act shall apply to arrests under sections 74 and Provisions of |
79 of this Act, although the person making such arrest is not acting under a warrant and is | sections 43 and
not a police officer having authority to arrest. 53 to apply to
arrests under
sections 74 and
79.
33. (1) The Police Force is responsible for maintaining and securing public safety and public Public safety
order, and public |
. order.
(2) The Police Force shall, in carrying out its responsibilities under subsection (1):
(a) uphold the provisions of the Constitution and other laws; i
(b) uphold and protect the fundamental rights of all persons in Nigeria;
an
(c) be fair to all persons in Nigeria notwithstanding their economic status
or religious, ethnic or political beliefs and affiliations.
(3) Subject to the provisions of subsection (1), the Commissioner of Police of a State is
responsible for maintaining security, public safety and public order within the State. |
(4) Where a person or organisation notifies the police of his or its intention to hold a public
meeting, rally or procession on a public highway, or such meetings in a place where the
===== PAGE 34 =====
public has access to, the police officer responsible for the area where the meeting, rally
, or procession will take place, shall mobilise personnel to provide security cover for the
meeting, rally or procession.
PART IX - PREVENTION OF OFFENCES AND SECURITY FOR GOOD
BEHAVIOUR
g4, (1) A police officer may intervene for the purpose of preventing, and shall, to the best of Police to
his ability, prevent the commission of an offence. ; prevent offences
. and ; injury to
(2) A police officer may of his authority intervene to prevent an injury attempted to be public property.
committed in his presence to any public property, whether movable or immovable, or
the removal of or injury to any public landmark or buoy or other mark used for
navigation.
35. A police officer receiving information of a plan to commit any offence shall communicate Information of
the information to the police officer to whom he is subordinate, and to any other officer plan to commit
whose duty it is to prevent or take cognizance of the commission of the offence. offence.
g6. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act or any other law relating to arrest, a police Arrest by police
officer on a reasonable suspicion of a plan to commit an offence, may arrest, without orders to prevent
from a magistrate and without warrant, the suspect where it appears to the officer that the offences.
commission of the offence cannot otherwise be prevented.
37. (1) A judge, magistrate, or any other public officer charged with responsibility for Prevention by
maintaining law and order may intervene to prevent the commission of an offence or other public
any damage to any public property, movable or immovable. officers of
offences and
(2) A person is bound to assist a judge or magistrate or police officer or any other public Muy public
ofticer reasonably demanding his aid: property.
(a) in preventing the commission of an offence or any damage to any
public property, movable or immovabie;
(b) in the suppression of a breach of the peace or in the prevention of any i
damage to any property, movable or immovable or to any railway,
canal, water supply, telecommunication system, oil pipeline, oil \
installation, electrical installation; or
(c) in the prevention of the removal of any public landmark, buoy or other |
mark used for navigation. |
PART X- PROPERTY FOUND AND UNCLAIMED, ETC. j
gg. (1) Where a police officer or any other person finds a lost property, the police officer or Found and
person who finds the property shall take it to the nearest police station within 24 hours _ unclaimed
after it is found. property.
(2A police officer on duty shall collect the property which was found and make a record
of it.
(3) A register shall be kept at a police station for the purpose of making entries of the
property found and brought to the station which shall contain:
(a) the type of property found;
(b) the description of the property stating the general particulars and state
. and condition of the property when it was brought to the police
station and any other relevant information relating to the property;
(c) the date and time it was found and brought; i
|
|
|
|
===== PAGE 35 =====
|
(d) the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the person who
. found and brought the property to the station;
(e) the name and rank of the police officer who collected the property; and
(f} the signatures of the police officer and the person who found and
brought the property to the station. ;
(4) A police officer who collects the lost and found property shall enter the details in the
register referred to in subsection (3) and prepare two forms acknowledging the receipt
of the lost and found property and give a duly signed copy to the person who found and
brought the property to the police station.
(5) The police officer in charge of the police station in possession of the property found
shall make a public announcement at least on three consecutive times in the print and
electronic media about the property in the custody of the police station for the rightful
owner to claim the property with authentic proof of ownership within a period of six
months.
(6) The police officer in charge of the station in possession of the property shall release the
property upon satisfactory proof of ownership.
(7) Where the property remains unclaimed after the expiration of six months, the police
officer in charge of that police station shall bring the property before a magistrate court
for auction and the proceeds shall be paid into the Police Reward Fund established
under section 91of this Act. |
(8) Where a property in Police custody is a perishable article or its custody involves i
unreasonable expense or inconvenience, it may be sold at any time, and the.proceeds of
sale shall be paid into the Police Reward Fund established under section 91 of this Act. |
(9) There shall be deducted from the proceeds of a sale under subsections (7) and (8), |
before being paid into the Police Reward Fund the cost, if any, of the sale and of any |
sum which the court may direct to be paid as a reward to any person by whom the |
property was delivered into the possession of the police. \
i
89, (1) Where a person appears in a police station in respect of an offence or an allegation of Documentation
the commission of an offence either as an accused | person or a witness, or as a relation ofarrest, ;
or friend of an accused person or a witness, the duty officer or such other officer as witnesses and i
may _be authorised by the officer-in-charge of the police station shall enter in the death in police i
official record book: station. i
|
(a) the name of the person and his national identity number, if any;
(b) the date of birth of the person;
(c) the reason for the person’s visits; j
(d) the name and address of the person’s next-of-kin; |
(e) the exact time the person comes to the station and leaves, for everyday |
he visits; and
(8 any ailment or medical condition which the person has.
(2) The particulars mentioned in subsection (1) shall be updated each day the person
par ‘ l p ‘y P
remains in custody in the police station.
(3) Where, in the discharge of the police duty, a person is shot, wounded or killed, the
officer commanding the operation shall record: |
(a) the number of those wounded or killed, the names of the victims or
their description as much as possible; and
===== PAGE 36 =====
. (b) efforts taken to ensure hospitalisation of the wounded or proper
preservation of the dead. :
(4) A police officer who fails to keep appropriate records referred to in subsections (1), (2)
and (3) commits a serious misconduct, which shall attract disciplinary measure.
(5) The Inspector-General of Police shall give a quarterly report to the Police Service
Commission itemising the number and identity of persons who: |
(a) were detained in all police formations across Nigeria; |
(b) were charged and prosecuted in the courts in Nigeria and the outcome j
of their cases;
(c) were killed or wounded during police operations across Nigeria; and
(d) died in police custody.
90, (A person who is aware that a person under his employment or control is missing shall, Missing |
within 24 hours report to the police: persons, |
(a) the identity of the missing person; and |
_(b) circumstances in which that person got missing. |
(2) When a report is made to the police under subsection (1) of this section, the duty
officer or such other designated staff shall immediately record the name and address of |
the missing person and the person who made the report. :
PART XI- ESTABLISHMENT OF THE POLICE REWARD FUND, ETC. AND OTHER |
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE POLICE FORCE i
|
91. (1) There is established for the Nigeria Police the Police Reward Fund (in this Act referred Bstablishment i
to as “the Reward Fund”) into which shall be paid: of the Police
Reward Fund, '
(a) all money levied by order of a senior officer on members of the police :
for offences against discipline;
(b) alf fines levied for assaults on members of the police; |
(c) one-third of fees paid by members of the public in respect of extracts
from reports made by the police;
(d) one-third of fees paid in accordance with Standing Orders for the |
services of police officers who would otherwise be off duty; and
(e) all sums ordered to be paid into the Fund under section.88 (7) of this |
o ct. ‘
(2) Subject to the rules for the time being in force under section 23 of the Finance Control |
and Management Act, the Reward Fund shal! be applied and disbursed at the direction Cap. F26, LEN, |
of the Inspector-General of Police, based on criteria laid by the Police Service 200+.
Commission: |
(a) to reward members of the police for exemplary services |
(b) for payment of ex gratia compassionate gratuities to widows or |
childten of deceased members of the force;
- |
(c) for making ex gratia payments towards. the funeral expenses of any |
member of the police who dies in the service of the police: and |
|
i
===== PAGE 37 =====
: (d) for such other purpose as may be determined, by the Nigerian Police
Council.
92, Police officers who have distinguished themselves with their outstanding performance in Recognition and
the discharge of their duties shall be duly honoured and recognised for their gallant and commendation
exemplary service by the Police Force: for gallantry and
exemplary
(a) by recommendation for national honours, attention being paid to service.
deserving officers inclusive;
(b) through public presentation of awards and certificates of exemplary
service from communities and civil society; or
(c) by the police setting aside a day or week in every year to celebrate
outstanding performance by its officers and to remember their fallen
heroes.
93, (1) A police officer shall not get himself involved in indebtedness of any kind while still in Police officer
service, and where he does, he shall be disciplined and the debt or liability shall be and |
recovered from his remuneration if the creditor can prove the indebtedness by indebtedness. |
withholding from the police officer’s remuneration an amount not exceeding one-third i
of his monthly remuneration until the amount of the debt or liability is made good. |
i
(2) Where the recovery of the debt or liability is by a court order, the court making the |
order shall give due notice to the senior police officer in charge of the command to |
which the indebted officer belongs, and the amount ordered shall be withheld or i
deducted from the indebted officer’s remuneration until the amount of the debt is i
made good. :
94, The remuneration of a police officer shall not be withheld on account of any debt or Exception.to
liability which he may have incurred before being appointed to the police. debt recovery. |
95, A police officer shall not, while in service, be directly involved in managing and running — Private business
any private business or trade except farming. and conflict of i
interest. i
{
PART XT-OFFENCES
96. (1)A police officer who: Offences by a
police officer. :
(a) begins, raises, abets, countenances, or excites mutiny; :
_(b) causes or joins in any sedition or disturbance of any nature whatsoever; i
|
(c) being at an assembly tending to riot, does not use his utmost endeavour |
to suppress the assembly; '
(d) coming to the knowledge of any mutiny, or intended mutiny does not i
without delay give information of the mutiny to his superior officer;
(e) strikes or offers any violence to his superior officer, while in the |
execution of his duty; |
(® deserts or aids or abets the desertion of an officer from the Nigeria
Police; . |
(g) on enlistment falsely states that he: |
(i) has not been convicted or imprisoned for a criminal offence, or
(ii) was never employed by the Government of the Federation or of a |
|
===== PAGE 38 =====
: State;
(hb) fails to come to the aid or to assist any person in need of assistance at
the time of distress:
@ shall. be subject to appropriate disciplinary proceedings in
accordance with the police disciplinary mechanisms, and
(ii) if found liable, shall be recommended for dismissal and charged to
court for prosecution in accordance with the relevant laws in force.
(2) A police officer shall not, in discharging his duty:
(a) discriminate against a person in Nigeria, based on the person’s- ;
' (i) place of origin,
ii) gender,
iil)socio-economic status, - a
ivjethnic, political or religious affiliation, or
(v)any form of disability, and
(b) use a language, or act in such a way that suggests a bias towards a
particular group. .
(3) A police officer may be proceeded against for desertion without reference to the time
during which he may have been absent, and may be found guilty, either of desertion or
of absence without leave.
(4) A police officer shall not be convicted as a deserter or of attempting to desert unless the |
court is satisfied that there was an intention on the part of the officer either not to return i
to the Police Force, or to escape some particular important service. |
97, Onreasonable suspicion that a person is a deserter, a police officer or any other person may Apprehension |
apprehend him and bring him immediately before a court having jurisdiction in the place of deserters, i
where he was found, which may deal with the suspected deserter or refer him to a court
having jurisdiction in the place in which he has deserted. i
98, A person who assaults, obstructs or resists a police officer in the discharge of his duty, or Assault ou |
aids or incites any other person to assault, obstruct or resist a police officer or other person police officer. |
aiding or assisting the police officer in the discharge of his duty, commits an offence and is |
table on conviction to a fine of $500,000 or imprisonment for a term of six months or |
ota. ,
99, Where a person is called upon to aid and assist a police officer who is, while in the Refusing to aid
discharge of his duty, assaulted or resisted or in danger of being assaulted or resisted, and _ police officer
the person refuses or neglects to aid and assist, the person commits an offence and is liable assaulted.
on conviction to a fine of 4100,000 or imprisonment for a term of three months or both.
100. (1) While on duty, a police officer shall not take any intoxicating liquor, psychotropic Drinking of
substances or stimulants, where he does, he shall be punished in accordance with the alcohol or use
police disciplinary procedures. of psychotropic
substances and
(2) A person who: stimulants while
on duty.
(a) knowingly harbours or entertains, or either directly or indirectly,
gives any intoxicating liquor, psychotropic substance or stimulant to
any police officer while on duty, or permits any such police officer to
abide or remain in his house unlawfully; except in cases of extreme
urgency,
(b) by threats or by offer of money, gift, spirits, liquors, psychotropic
substances or stimulants induces or attempts to induce any police
===== PAGE 39 =====
; officer to commit a breach of his duty as a police officer or to omit
. any part of such duty, commits an offence and is liable on conviction
to a fine of at least N50,000.
101. A person not being a police officer who: Inersonation
. Of poilce
(a) Puts on or assumes either in whole or in rea the apparel, name, officer,
designation, or description of any police officer or resembling and
intended to resemble the apparel, name or designation of any police
officer, or
(b) In any way pretends to be a police officer for the Purpose of obtaining
admission into any house or other place, or of doing any act which
such person would not by law be entitled to do of his own authority,
conunits an offence and is liable, on summary conviction to a fine of at
least N100,000 or imprisonment for at least one year or both.
102, (1) A person who: Obtaining
admission into
(a) knowingly uses or attempts to pass off any forged or false certificate, Police Force by
character, letter, or any other document for the purpose of obtaining fraud.
admission into the Nigeria Police Force; or
(b) on applying for enlistment, makes any false answer to any statement
put to him by any appropriate authority, commits an offence and, on
summary conviction to a fine of N50,000 or imprisonment for three
mouths or both,
(2) A police officer may arrest without a warrant any person whom he reasonably believes
or suspects of having committed an offence under this section, :
103. Nothing in this Act is be construed to exempt a police officer from being proceeded against Ordinary course
by the ordinary course of law when accused of any offence punishable under any other Act of law not to be :
or law. : interfered with. |
- 104, (IA person who has been acquitted by a court of any offence shall not be tried on the Persons |
same charge or suffer any punishment under this Act : acquitted by the j
court not to be |
(2) Where a police officer has been convicted by a court for an offence, he is not liable to tied for the i
be punished for the same offence under this Act, but may have his rank or grade same offence |
reduced or be dismissed from the Police Force. under this Act, |
PART XIII~ SPECIAL CONSTABLES
105. (1) The Special Constabulary is established under this Act. The Special i
Constabulary
(2) The Special Constabuiary is deemed pact of the Nigeria Police Force, and accordingly
references in this Act to the Police Force shall, subject to the provisions of this Act,
include, and be deemed always to have included, referénces to the Special
Constabulary. i
(3) The Special Constabulary shall consist of- |
(a) special constables appointed in normal circumstances under section
