Nigeria Police Act 2020
Section: 6
Status: FOUND
Confidence: 100
Page start: 39
Page end: 50
OCR line start: 2112
OCR line end: 2652
Reason: 

----- RECONSTRUCTED TEXT -----
06 of this Act; and
(6) such emergency special constables as may be appointed from time to \
_ time under section 108 of this Act. |
(4) If any enactment requires police officers to perform military duties or confers power
(whether expressly or in general terms) to require police ‘officers to perform such
° a
===== PAGE 40 =====
duties, that enactment shall not, in the absence of express provision to the contrary ,
. extend to members of the special constables.
106, (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the competent authority may appoint as a Appointment of
special constable any person who: special
: constables.
(a) has attained the age of 21 years but has not attained the age of 50
years;
(b) is of good-character and physically fit; and :
(c) has signified willingness to serve as a special constable.
(2) The Inspector-General of Police shall, from time to time by notice published in the
Force Administrative Instructions, fix the maximum number of persons who may hold
appointments under this section, and a person shall not be appointed as a special
constable under this section if his appointment would cause the number, for the time
being so fixed, to be exceeded.
(3) Subject to subsection (2), the Inspector-General of Police may:
(a) review the maximum number of persons who may hold appointments
under this section in any territory; and
(b) fix the maximum number of persons appointed under this section who |
may hold any particular rank in the special constabulary in any |
territory; '
i
(c) in either case, fix different numbers with respect to different I
territories, and every competent authority shall ensure that the |
_. numbers fixed under this subsection are not exceeded. i
(4) Every special constable appointed under this section- |
|
(a) shall be appointed to serve as a special constable for one year or such i
longer period as may be agreed between him and the authority by |
whom he is appointed, and shall, on appointment, sign an engagement |
in the prescribed form to serve as a special constable for that period;
(b) shall be appointed in respect of the Police Area Command or, where i
there is no Police Area Command, the Police Division in which he |
resides or is employed; \
(c) shall, within the territory in which the police area in respect of which
he is appointed is situated, but not elsewhere, have the powers,
privileges and immunities of a special constable; and subject to the
provisions of this Act, shall be a member of the special constable for |
all purposes:
Provided that a special constable appointed in respect of a police area within the
Federal Capital Territory, Abwia shall have the powers, privileges and immunities of a
special constable not only within the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja but also within
any police area adjacent to the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.
(JA special constable shall have such rank as may be assigned to him by the competent
authority, and the assigning authority shall cause notice of it to be published in the
Force Administrative Instructions. .
(6) A special constable may be, within three months before the end of his first or any
subsequent period of engagement, and with the permission of the competent authority,
re-engaged to serve for a further period of one year or such longer period as may be
agreed between him and the authority and, if he does so, his appointment under this
section is deemed to have been extended accordingly.
===== PAGE 41 =====
|
|
|
, |
. (7) Without prejudice to the right of the competent-authority to refuse permission in any |
case; a person is not permitted to re-gngage under subsection (6) unless he would, if not
already a special constable, be qualified or appointment as such under this section.
(8) Every special constable shall, on appointment, be issued with a certificate of
appointinéat in the prescribed form, and, on the determination of his appointment
(whether by the passage of time or under section 106 of this Act) shall be issued with a
certificate of discharge in the prescribed form.
107. (1) A special constable appointed under section 106 of this Act may, at any time, give to Resignation,
the senior police officer in charge of the police area in respect of which he is suspension and
appointed notice in writing to the effect that he desires to resign his appointment on a dismissal of
date (not being less than 30 days later than the date on which the notice is given) special
mentioned in the notice. constables
appointed under
(2) On receipt of a notice under subsection (1), the senior police officer in question shall section 106.
refer it to the competent authority, and if the competent authority consents to the
notice, the appointment of the special constable by whom the notice was given shall
determine on the date mentioned in the notice or the date on which he is notified that
the competent authority has given its consent under this subsection, whichever, is the
ater. |
if
|
(3) The competent authority may, at any time for reasons appearing to it to be sufficient |
by notice-in writing, immediately suspend or determine the appointment of any |
special constable appointed under section 106 and may, if it deems fit, do so without |
informing the special constable of the reasons for his action, but shall in every case 1
immediately report its action and the reasons to the Inspector-General of Police. |
i
(4) A special constable whose appointment is suspended or determined under subsection |
(3) otherwise than by the spector-General of Police, may appeal against the |
suspension or determination to the competent authority, and any such appeal shail be |
heard and determined by the competent authority to whom it is made. i
(5) Any delegation of the powers of the Inspector-General of Police under subsections i
. (3) and (4) shall be such as to secure that in every case the competent authority |
having power to hear and determine an appeal under subsection (4) is a police officer i
of higher rank than the police officer against whose action the appeal is brought. |
108. (1) If at any time the Commissioner of Police for a State or Federal Capital Tervitory is Appointment of
. . . . emergenc:
satisfied, as police in that State, that an unlawful assembly or riot or breach of the has special y
taken may reasonably be expected to take place in that area, or that by reason of other constables.
special circumstance it in necessary in the public interest for emergency special |
constables to be appointed in respect of that area, he may authorise the senior police |
officer in charge of that area or any Chief Superintendent of Police to appoint person |
resident or employed in that area (whether male or female) emergency special
constables. ‘
(2) An authorisation under this section need not be in writing, but shall specify the
maximum number of emergency special constables who may be appointed under that
authorisation.
(3) Where a senior police officer proposes to appoint any person as an emergency special
constable under an authorisation given under this section, he shall cause to be served on
that person a notice in the prescribed form requiring him to present himself at a time
and place specified in the notice for appointment as an emergency special constable.
===== PAGE 42 =====
| |
|
. (4) Every person on whom a notice is served wader subsection (3) shall present himself at i
the time and place specified in the notice and shall, on being required to do so by the
senior police officer proposing to appoint him, make and sign a promise in the
prescribed form to serve as an emergency special constable until such time as his
appointment is determined under this section, and immediately after he has made
signed that promise, the senior police officer shall hand to him a document in the
prescribed form appointing him as an emergency special constable in respect of the
police area to which the authorisation under which he is being appointed relates.
(5) Every emergency special constable:
(a) shall, in the police area in respect of which he is appointed. not
elsewhere, have the powers, privileges and immunities of a special
constable; and :
(b) subject to the provisions of this Act, shall be a member of the special
constabulary for all purposes. .
(6) The senior police officer in charge of the police area in respect of which an emergency |
special constable is appointed may at any time, and shall, if so directed by the |
Commissioner of Police for the State in which that police area is situated, by notice in |
writing forthwith, or with effect from a future date specified in the notice, determine
the emergency special constable's appointment, and on the determination of his
appointment under this section, an emergency special constable shall be issued with a |
certificate of discharge in the prescribed form. |
(7) Any person who, without reasonable excuse (proof of which shall lie on him): |
(a) refuses or fails to comply with the requirements of a notice served on
him under subsection (3); or
(b) refuses to make and sign a promise to serve on being required to do so
under subsection (3) is liable on summary conviction to a fine not
exceeding M10,000.
(8) The provisions of this section shall apply in relation to the Federal Capital Territory,
Abuja as they apply in relation to a State, subject to the modification that, in relation to
the Federal Capital Territory. Abuja any reference to the Commissioner of Police shall
be construed as a reference to the Inspector-General of Police.
(9) The provisions of this section shall have effect subject to section 106 (2) and (3) of this
Act.
i
===== PAGE 43 =====
109. (1) The Commissioner of Police for a State or Federal Capital Territory or the Inspector- Provisions
. SU; ementar
. General of Police; no cction Ds.
(a) on giving an authorisation under section 108 of this Act, shall
forthwith inform the President of his action and of the circumstances
which led him to taice it, and shal! as soon as possible cause notice of
the giving of the authorisation to be published in the Force
Administrative Instructions; and
(b) as soon as possible after all emergency special constables appointed
under that authorisation have been discharged, shall cause notice of
that fact to be published in the Force Administrative Instructions.
(2) The Inspector-General of Police may, by order published in the Force Administrative
Instructions, declare persons of any class or description specified in the order to be
exempted from appointment as emergency special constables under section 108 of this |
Act, and the power to appoint persons as emergency special constables under that |
: section shall not extend to persons of any class or description for the time being so
specified. |
(3) Any power to make or determine appointments under or by virtue of section 108 of this
Act shall be exercisable only while there is in force the necessary delegation of that |
power by the Inspector-General of Police.
|
110. (1) The Inspector-General of Police may provide for use by special constables such as Equipment.
- batons, clothing and other equipment as he considers necessary for the proper carrying
out of their duties,
(2) Any expenses incurred by the Inspector-General of Police under this section shall be
defrayed out of the funds of the Police Force.
I11. (1) Regulation made under section 139 (1) (a) of this Act with respect to the organisation lnstriction of
soe ‘ . . special
and administration of the Force shall not require special constables to attend for constables,
instruction on more than four days in any one month or for periods in the aggregate to ;
more than 24 howrs in any month.
(2) Any person responsible for giving instruction to special constables under the
regulations shall have regard as far as possible to the convenience of special constables
who are to attend for instruction also, where applicable, to that of the employers of
such special constables.
===== PAGE 44 =====
|
|
; |
122. (1) Except as expressly provided by this section or by regulations made under subsection Allowances |
. ‘ : . : ensions, ete,
(3), 4 person's service as a special constable shall render him for a stipend as may be p |
determined by the Inspector-General of Police as approved by Police Council. |
|
|
(2) A special constable shall: . |
|
|
(a) have no claim on the Police Reward Fund ; and |
|
.{b) not as such be entitled to occupy living accommodation provided at the
public expense. .
(3) Regulations made under section 139 (1) (a) of this Act may provide for stipends to be |
paid to special constables- |
|
(a) in respect of expenses incurred by them in connection with their |
an attendance at periods of instruction;
(b) as compensation for loss of earnings during periods of full-time duty; |
and
| |
(c) in respect of the use by special constables or of this subsection, the |
rauk of Inspector of their own vehicles while on full-time duty, but |
shall not provide for the payment of any other stipends to special
constables; and the amount of any such stipends as is mentioned in |
paragraph (a) or of this subsection shall be fixed by the regulations,
- and shall not be calculated by reference to the actual expenses or loss |
of earnings of the person to whom it is payable. |
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of section 54 of this Act, the regulations may make |
provision for enabling any such stipend as is mentioned in subsection (3) of this section
to be withheld by a senior police officer if, in his opinion, there are good reasons for |
withholding.
(5) Subject to subsection (7), section 6 of the Pensions Reform: Act (which contains ActNo. 4, 2014.
corresponding provisions applicable to police officers above the rank of constable)
shall not apply to special constables as they apply to regular police officers.
(6) Subject to subsection (7), Regulation 24 (1) and (2) of the repealed Pensions |
Regulations (which make provision for the payment of pensions to officers in respect
of permanent injuries received while on duty) may apply to special constables as they |
apply to regular police officers.
(7) For the purposes of subsection (6), references to a retirement shall be construed as
references to a retirement from employment other than employment as a special
===== PAGE 45 =====
- constable.
(8) If a special constable is killed or sustains injuries at a time when he holds some other
office in the Public Service of the Federation or of a State, his duty as a special
constable is, for the purpose of the Pensions Reform Act, deemed to form part of his ActNo 420M.
duty as the holder of that other office, and subsections (5) and (6) shall not apply in this
case. .
(9) Any pension granted under subsection (5) or (6) shall be subject to the provisions of the
Act under which it is granted and shall cease or be dealt with accordingly.
(10) In this section, "regular police officer” means a police officer who is neither a special
constable nor a supernumerary police officer.
PART XIV - COMMUNITY POLICING COMMITTEE .
113. (1) For the effective and efficient Policing of communities in a State or Federal Capital Establishment
Territory, the Commissioner of Police of a State shall establish Community Policing of Community
Committee (in this Act referred to as “the Policing Commiitee’’) which shall consist of Policing
representatives of the Police Force and the local community in the State. Committee.
(2) A Commissioner of Police of a State shall establish Community Sub-Policing |
Committee (in this Act referred to as “the Sub-Policing Committees”) at all Divisional |
; Police Headquarters in the State or Federal Capital Territory. :
(3) Subject to section 116 (1) (b) of this Act, the Cornmissioner of Police and members
designated by him from time to time for the purpose, shall be members of the Policing i
Committees and Sub-Policing Committees established at various. police formations. '
|
114. (1) A Commissioner of Police of a State or Federal Capital Territory shall, in Establishment
collaboration with the relevant stakeholders in the community, establish Divisional ofDivisional
Community Policing Committee (in this Act referred to as “Divisional Policing Community i
Committee”) in all Police Divisions within the State. Policing |
Committee.
(2) A Divisional Policing Committee shall, in collaboration with the relevant stakeholders |
in the community, establish Divisional Community Policing Sub-Committee in all
police formations in the Division.
(3) Subject to section 116 (1) (b) of this Act, the Divisional Police Officer and the members
designated by him, from time to time for that purpose, shall be members of the
a Divisional Policing Committee concerned.
115. (1) A Commissioner of Police of a State shall, in collaboration with the State Executive Establishment
Council, establish a State Community Sub-Policing Committee. of State
Community
(2) A State Community Policing Committee shall, subject to subsection (3), consist of Policing
representatives of Divisional Community Policing Committees designated for that Committees
purpose by the Divisional Community Policing Committees of a State concerned.
(3) Subject to section 116 (1) (b) of this Act, the Commissioner of Police in a State and the
members designated by him, from time to time for the purpose, shall be members of the
State Community Policing Committee concerned,
===== PAGE 46 =====
116, (1) The objectives of the Committees are to: Objectives of
: : Community |
(a) maintain a partnership between the community and the Police Force; Policing
. ommittees, |
(b) promote communication between the Police Force and the community;
(c) promote co-operation between the Police and the community in |
fulfilling the needs of the community regarding policing; ;
(d) improve the police service to the community; and
(e) improve transparency and accountability in the provision of police
services to the community.
(2) This section does not prevent police liaison with the community by means other than
Policing Committee, Sub-Policing Committee and Divisional Policing Committtee.
117. (1) The duties of community policing officers shall inchude assisting the Police in: Duties of
community
(a) crime detection and prevention; policing
officers.
(b) conflict resolution;
(c) criminal intelligence gathering and dissemination to the local Police |
Commanders; |
(d) maintenance of law and ofder; . |
: :
(e) deployment to complement the conventional Police in the patrol of the '
public space within their local communities;
(® reassuring and advising the public on public safety, crime prevention i
and security tips; i
(g) dealing with minor offences and social vices;
. na . : |
(h) working with the community, schools, and young people, business {
communities, religious bodies, cultural groups, community-based i
associations, recreational centres and hospitality businesses toward i
crime control; and :
|
(i) traffic management and school safety duties. i
(2) The Inspector-General of Police, in implementing community policing, shall promote
organisational strategies that Support the systematic use of partnerships and problem-
solving techniques to proactively address conditions that cause crime, social disorder
and fear of crime. |
(3) The Inspector-General of Police in implementing community policing may vary |
strategies according to the needs of the communities involved and the cultural context
and local models which will vary and evolve according to the differing needs of
differing communities, whilst retaining and sharing the same set of goals and basic
principles. |
{18. A State Community Policing Committee or Divisional Community Policing Sub- Functions of |
Committee shall perform the functions it deems necessary and appropriate to achieve the Community |
objectives stated in section 116 of this Act. Policing '
Comunittees. |
119. (1) A Committee, Sub-Committee and Divisional Committee shall: Procedural i
matters.
(a) elect, from amongst its members, a chairman, vice-chairman and a
secretary who shall be police officers;
\
|
|
===== PAGE 47 =====
- (b) determine the number of members to be assigned by the State
Commissioner or Divisional Police Officer to serve as members of the
Comunittee or Sub-Committee concerned;
(c) determine its own procedure and cause minutes to be kept of its
proceedings; and
(d) whenever it considers necessary, co-opt other members, experts or
community leaders to the Committee, Sub-Committee and Divisional
Committee in an advisory capacity.
(2) Members of the Committee, Sub-Committee and Divisional Committee shall render
their services on a voluntary basis and shall have no claim to any remuneration solely
for services rendered to the Committee, Sub-Committee or Divisional Committee.
(3) The majority of the members of a Committee, Sub-Committee or Divisional Committee
shall constitute a quorum at any of its meetings.
(4) In the absence of the Chairman of a Committee, Sub-Committee or a Divisional
Committee at a meeting , the vice-chairman shall preside over the meeting, and if both
the Chairman and Vice-Chairman are absent, the members present shall elect one of
them present to preside over the meeting.
PART XV — TRAFFIC WARDEN SERVICE |
. |
120. (1) There is established a Traffic Warden Service (in this Act referred to as “the Warden’ Establishment i
Service”). of Traffic |
Warden Service. |
(2) The Warden Service shall consist of traffic wardens appointed from time to time under |
this Act.
(3) The Warden Service shall be a part of the Police Force and accordingly, references to |
the Police Force shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, include references to the |
Warden Service. |
(4) Notwithstanding subsection (3), where any Act, whether passed before or after the |
commencement of this Act, requires police officers to discharge military duties, or
confers any power on any person whether expressly or in general terms to require
police officers to discharge those duties, that Act shall not, in the absence of express
provision to the contrary, extend to traffic wardens.
(5) Traffic wardens shall be employed to perform functions novmally undertaken by police
officers in connection with the contro! and regulation of, or the enforcement of the law
relating to, road traffic and shall, in that connection, act under the direction of the |
Police Force.
|
(6) Without pisjudice to the generality of the provisions of subsections (1) - (5), a traffic
warden shall deal primarily with:
(a) the general control and direction of motor traffic on the highway;
(0) assisting pedestrians to cross the road; and
(c) controlling vehicles stopping or parking in unauthorised places.
121. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any law, the Inspector-General of Police has Recruitment of
power to appoint, promote, transfer, dismiss or exercise disciplinary control over traffic twaffic wardens.
wardens.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person may be recruited a traffic warden if he:
(a) is not less than 18 and not more than 25 years of age;
|
===== PAGE 48 =====
|
|
. (b) is in Possession of a minimum educational qualification of Senior
: Secondary School Certificate; |
(c) at least 167.64 centimetres and 162.56 centimetres tall respectively for |
the men and women;
(d) in the case of men, has at least 86.36 centimetres chest measurement
when fully expanded,
(e) is of good character and physically fit; and
(f has signified his willingness to serve as a traffic warden,
(3) The Police Service Commission on the recommendation of the Inspector-General of
Police shall from time to time by notice published in the Federal Government Gazette,
fix the maximum number of persons who may at any given time hold office under this
section; and a person shall not be enlisted as a traftic warden if his enlistment would
cause the number for the time being so fixed to be exceeded, ,
a |
(4) The Inspector-General of Police may- |
(a) from time to time with the approval of the Police Service Commission, |
fix the maximum number of traffic wardens who may, at any time’
hold appointments in any State;
: (b) at his own discretion, fix the maximum number of traffic wardens who
may, at any time, hold any particular rank in the Warden Service in \
any State: and |
(c) in either case, fix different numbers with respect to different States, |
i
i
122. (1) A traffic warden on appointment, or if re-appointed for a further term, shall make and Declarations by
subscribe to the police declaration prescribed by the Oaths Act as modified under taftie wardens. 1
subsection (2). :
(2) The police declaration prescribed by the Oaths Act is modified by substituting for the ae O1, LEN,
words: “we |
(a) “police officer”, wherever they occur, the words “traffic warden”; and |
(b) “for the preservation of peace’’ to the end of the, declaration, the i
words, ‘to discharge all duties of my office according to law’’. '
123. (1) A traffic warden appointed under this Act shall be: . Tenure of office |
of traffic
(a) appointed to serve as a traffic warden for 35 years of service or 60 wardens |
years of age whichever comes first; and i
i
(b) pensionable only in the Police State Command in which he resides. |
|
(2) A traffic warden may, subject to satisfactory conduct and service, be re-appointed for |
further three years until the expiration of the tenth year of his appointment in the
Warden Service, when he may elect to determine his appointment or elect that his
service be allowed to continue until he is 55 years of age.
124, A traffic warden appointed under this Act shall, when on duty: Powers of
traffic wardens.
(a) have the powers, privileges and immunities of a police officer under
any law relating to the regulation of road traffic; and
(b) be in uniform within the Police State Command in which he is
appointed to serve, but not elsewhere.
|
===== PAGE 49 =====
125, A traffic warden: Certificate of
. appointment
(a) on first appointment, shall be issued with a certificate of appointment and discharge.
in a form approved by the Inspector~General of Police; and
(b) on the determination of that or any subsequent appointment whether
by effluxion of time or under section 120 of this Act, shall in like
manner be issued with a Certificate of Discharge.
126. A traffic warden shall have such rank as may be assigned to him by the Inspector-General Ranks of tzaffic
of Police beyond the following grades: wardens,
(a) Traffic Warden Grade IIT;
-(b) Traffic Warden Grade I;
(c) Traftic Warden Grade I;
(d) Senior Traffic Warden Il;
(s) Senior Traffic Warden I;
(f) Assistant Superintendent of Traffic II,
. (g) Assistant Superintendent of Traffic I;
(h) Deputy Superintendent of Traffic.
127, (1) A.traffic warden appointed under this Act may at any time give to any senior police Resignation. |
officer under whom he is serving, notice in’ writing of his intention to resign his i
appointment on a date mentioned in the notice not being less than 28 days later than the i
date on which the notice is given. i
(2) On receipt by the senior police officer of the notice referred to in subsection (1) of this
section, the senior police officer shall immediately refer such notice to. the '
Conunissioner having control over him and the traffic warden and if the Commissioner |
consents to the notice having effect, the appointment of the traffic warden shall be |
terminated. : |
128. (1) In so far as the context so admits, but subject to the provisions of this Act, a traffic Discipline. |
warden shall be subject to the provisions of the Police Regulations subsidiary to this
Act, for purposes of discipline.
|
(2) In the application to Traffic Wardens of the Second Schedule to the Police Regulations,
references to Constables, Corporals, Sergeants, Inspectors and Senior Police Officers
shall include respectively references to Traffic Wardens Grade III-I and Senior Traffic
Wardens Grade II-I and Superintendents of Traffic respectively.
129, (1) The Inspector-General of Police may provide, for use by the traffic wardens, such Provision of
equipment as he considers necessary for the proper discharge of their duties under this equipment.
Act,
(2) Any expenses incurred by the Inspector-General of Police under this section shall be
defrayed out of the General Fund of the Police Force.
130. (1) A traffic warden is required to undergo a course of training atthe Traffic Training instruction of
School of a Police College for 12 weeks or such other or further period as the trarfic warden.
Inspector-General of Police may determine.
(2) A traffic warden shall, on appointment, be allocated a service number with the letters,
“TW”? and the service numbers of all traffic wardens employed under .this Act shall
===== PAGE 50 =====
: |
